PAGE 1
Towards a statistical theory of optimal
quantization
Helmut Strasser 1
Institut f¨ ur Statistik,
Wirtschaftsuniversit¨ at Wien, A-1090 Wien, Austria
Abstract. In this paper we suggest an approach to unify some concepts of quan-
tization of empirical data along the principles of statistical decision theory. In this
way various quantization methods can be evaluated in decision theoretic terms, and
particular quantization methods can be distinguished as being optimal for statis-
tical decision problems. The approach of this paper is strongly inspired by ideas
of Bock (1996). The basic concept is the relation of majorization of measures. The
main conclusions follow from the theory of comparison of experiments by Blackwell
(1951, 1953) and from mathematical results by P¨ otzelberger (2000). For algorithmic
aspects of our approach we refer to P¨ otzelberger and Strasser (2000).
1 Introduction
Roughly speaking, the concept of quantization can be described as follows:
A distribution σ on a Borelﬁeld F of a vector space V is to be replaced by
a distribution τ with ﬁnite support. The substitution is to be carried out in
such a way that the data governed by σ are summarized and the complexity
of the distribution is reduced.
Let us explain the formal concept of a quantization by the special case
where the starting point is a partition of the data. This construction will be
basic for our subsequent considerations. Moreover, it illustrates the strong
relation between cluster analysis and quantization.
Let B = (B1, B 2, . . . , B m) ⊆ F be a partition of V and let σ(Bi) > 0 for
every i = 1, 2, . . . , m . If we denote
σ(A|Bi) := σ(A ∩ Bi)
σ(Bi) , A ∈ F,
then the distribution σ can be written as
σ =
m∑
i=1
σ(Bi)σ(. |Bi),
i.e. as a mixture of distributions with disjoint supports. Now, we deﬁne a
measure τ with ﬁnite support in the following way: Let the mass points of
the measure τ be the centroids
ti :=
∫
x σ(dx|Bi)

PAGE 2
2 Strasser
of the mixture components and deﬁne the weights of the measure τ to be
wi := σ(Bi). Then we have
τ :=
m∑
i=1
wiδti,
where δx denotes the one-point measure at x. The measure τ will then be
called the quantization of σ deﬁned by the partition B, and it will be denoted
by the symbol τ = σB.
For practical purposes it would be suﬃcient to consider only quantiza-
tions which are deﬁned by partitions in the way just described. However, it
is possible to extend this construction in such a way that the general concept
of majorization of measures may be applied. The historical starting point of
majorization was measuring the concentration of wealth in a human popula-
tion. Details on the general theory of majorization can be found in Marshall
and Olkin (1979). The connection between quantization and majorization
will turn out to be very fruitful for a theoretical analysis of quantization.
We want to quantize a distribution σ in such a way that the loss of
information is as least as possible. Thus, the following questions are raised:
1. How shall we measure the loss of information caused by a quantization ?
2. How can we ﬁnd quantizations such that the loss of information is
small ?
In applied data analysis many methods are suggested how to perform
quantizations. It is an important point to ﬁnd unifying ideas within the vari-
ety of these methods. Actually, there is such a unifying point of view which
covers several common methods. In Strasser (2000b) and in P¨ otzelberger and
Strasser (2000) the following approach to optimal quantization is considered:
For any given convex function f the integral
∫
f dσB =
m∑
i=1
wif (ti) =
m∑
i=1
σ(Bi)f
( ∫
x σ(dx|Bi)
)
is to be maximized where B varies among all partitions with at most m sub-
sets. This construction principle covers (depending on the underlying convex
function f ) minimum variance partitions (resp. principal point quantizations,
for f (x) = ||x||2), and Kohonen quantizations (in the sense of SOFM, for
f (x) = ||x||). Moreover, this principle is suﬃciently general to yield a lot of
new quantization methods (see Steiner (1999)) which bring about consider-
able advantages for practical purposes (see Strasser (2000a), as well as the
references there). The number
If (τ) :=
∫
f dτ
can be considered as a measure of information within the quantization τ.
In Strasser (2000b) this interpretation is justiﬁed both heuristically and by
simple decision theoretic arguments.

PAGE 3
Quantization 3
In the present paper we will give a well-founded analysis of this optimiza-
tion principle. We will show that the classical ideas of statistical decision
theory lead to this optimization principle in a straightforward manner. The
basic ideas of our analysis have been applied for the ﬁrst time by Bock (1996)
for dichotomies (simple discrimination problems). Let us explain the argu-
ments by Bock as an introduction into the main results of the present paper.
Bock starts with a dichotomy E = ( Ω, A, (P1, P 2)). The probability dis-
tributions P1 and P2 are to be distinguished by statistical decision functions.
The statistical separability is described by a so-called f -divergence
If (E) :=
∫
f
( dP2
dP1
)
dP1
where f is some convex function. Let us denote by σ := L
( dP2
dP1
⏐⏐⏐P1
)
the
distribution of the likelihood ratio of E under P1. Then we have
If (E) =
∫
f dσ.
Bock attempts to ﬁnd a partition C = (C1, C 2, . . . , C m) consisting of at most
m subsets such that within the reduced experiment E|C= ( Ω, C, (P1, P 2))
the probability measures P1 and P2 can be separated as well as possible.
For this, the partition C should be such that the f -divergence of the reduced
experiment
If (E|C) :=
∫
f
(
EP1
( dP2
dP1
⏐⏐C
) )
dP1
is maximal.
The way to solve this problem is outlined by Bock as follows: If the distri-
bution σ of the likelihood ratio is quantized by a partition B with m subset
in such a way that
If (σB) =
∫
f dσ B
is maximal, then the partition C deﬁned by Ci :=
{dP2
dP1
∈ Bi
}
is the so-
lution of the original decision theoretic problem. Moreover, Bock suggests
algorithms to perform the necessary quantization of σ.
These ideas by Bock show that there is a close connection between quan-
tization of distributions and statistical decision theory. Decision theoretic
problems lead to quantization problems, and conversely, quantization prob-
lems may be interpreted in a decision theoretic way. These mutual relations
between statistical decision theory and quantization are the subject of this
paper.
Let us give an overview over subjects and results.
In section 2 we give an introduction into the theory of majorization. This
basically purely mathematical theory will be the general framework for our

PAGE 4
4 Strasser
view of quantization. The main theorem of majorization is a result going
back to Hardy, Littlewood and Polya (1929) which relates majorization to
the comparison of integrals of convex functions.
In section 3 we deﬁne our view of quantization as an optimization problem
in terms of majorization. We report some fundamental results by P¨ otzelberger
(2000a and 2000b) showing that maximizing If (τ) for arbitrary convex func-
tions actually gives the complete solution of the quantization problem.
Section 4 is devoted to the relations between statistical decision theory
and the theory of majorization. We explain some results of Blackwell’s ((1951)
and (1953)) theory of the comparison of statistical experiments. The basic
result by Blackwell states that statistical experiments may be compared by
the majorization order applied to the distributions of their likelihood ratios.
In view of the theorem by Hardy, Littlewood and Polya (actually by some
of its extensions) the comparison can be carrried out in terms of integrals of
convex functions. This closes the gap to the approach by Bock (1996).
In section 5 we ﬁnally consider the problem of reduction of complexity
of statistical experiments. We show that looking for a most informative but
ﬁnitely generated subﬁeld is equivalent to an optimal quantization of the
distribution of the likelihood ratios (of the standard measure, in terms of
Blackwell’s theory). By P¨ otzelberger’s theorems it follows that quantizations
which are maximal with respect to majorization can be obtained by maxi-
mizing integrals of convex functions. This supports the claim that our view
of quantization is the appropriate one for statistical decision problems.
2 Majorization
The concept of majorization has a long history and a lot of applications.
The range of applications starts with concentration measurement, covers a
plenty of inequalities in purely mathematical areas, and extends as far as in-
formation theory, potential theory and statistical decision theory. The book
by Marshall and Olkin (1979) contains a lot of information on majorization.
Blackwell (1951) discovered the connection between majorization and statis-
tical decision theory. This particular topic has been developed very far by
LeCam (1964) and Torgersen (1970). These results and their extension to
the general theory of majorization are presented by Torgersen (1991).
Let V be a ﬁnite dimensional vector space with Borelﬁeld F. Moreover let
σ and τ be two probability measures on ( V, F). Throughout the following we
will assume tacitely that all probability measures have ﬁnite ﬁrst moments.
2.1 A special case
Suppose that the measure τ has ﬁnite support, i.e.
τ =
m∑
i=1
wiδti.

PAGE 5
Quantization 5
Then the measure τ is said to be majorized by the measure σ if τ is built
from σ by a procedure of a very particular type. We are now going to describe
this type of procedure.
The transformation of σ into τ consists of two steps:
1. In the ﬁrst step the measure σ is decomposed into a mixture of m proba-
bility measures. This means that we look for probability measures σ1, . . . , σ m
on ( V, F), such that σ can be written as a convex combination
σ(A) =
m∑
i=1
wiσi(A), A ∈ F. (1)
The weights w1, . . . , w m of this convex combination will serve as weights of
the resulting measure τ.
2. In the second step we compute the centroids of the measures σ1, . . . , σ m,
i.e.
ti =
∫
x σi(dx), i = 1, 2, . . . , m, (2)
and we deﬁne these centroids t1, . . . t m to be the mass points of the resulting
measure τ.
Roughly speaking, the transformation of σ into τ can be summarized
as follows: The measure τ arises from σ by desintegration and subsequent
averaging.
In this way we arrive at a ﬁrst deﬁnition of majorizazion.
Deﬁnition 1. Let σ and τ be probability measures ( V, F). The measure
τ = ∑ m
i=1 wiδti with ﬁnite support is majorized by σ, in symbols σ ≻ τ, if
there are probability measures σ1, . . . , σ m on ( V, F), such that equations (1)
and (2) are valid.
In the following we will name a measure τ with ﬁnite support such that
σ ≻ τ as a quantization of σ. We are aware of the fact that this is a restriction
of the common more general use of the term quantization in the scientiﬁc
literature. However, we will be able to show that this restriction is appropriate
for the purposes of statistical decision theory.
Clearly, a measure σ admits many desintegrations of the form (2). There-
fore, in general there are many diﬀerent quantizations τ of σ.
Before we turn to the general concept of majorization (where τ need not
have ﬁnite support) we remind of the special case of Section 1, where the
quantization τ = σB was deﬁned by a partition B of V .
2.2 The general case
In order to explain the general meaning of σ ≻ τ we have to change the
formal description of desintegration and subsequent averaging.

PAGE 6
6 Strasser
Let us start again from the equations (1) and (2). We deﬁne a transition
probability D : (y, A ) ↦→D(y, A ) by
D(y, A ) = σi(A) if y = ti, i = 1, 2, . . . , m,
or in slightly diﬀerent words
D(y, A ) :=
m∑
i=1
σi(A)1{ti}(y), A ∈ F, y ∈ V.
This deﬁnes D for τ-almost all y ∈ V . Using D we may write the equations
(1) and (2) as
σ(A) =
m∑
i=1
wiσj(A) ⇔ σ(A) =
∫
D(y, A ) τ(dy)
and
ti =
∫
x σi(dx), i = 1, 2, . . . , m, ⇔ y =
∫
xD(y, dx ) τ-a.e.
The transition probability D is called a dilation from τ to σ.
This point of view can be extended to arbitrary probability measures.
Deﬁnition 2. Let σ and τ be probability measures on V . The measure σ is
a majorization of τ (in symbols σ ≻ τ), if there is a dilation from τ to σ, i.e.
if there is a transition probability D : F × V → R such that
σ(A) =
∫
D(A, y ) τ(dy), A ∈ F, (3)
and
y =
∫
x D(dx, y ) τ − a.e. (4)
It is easy to see that for measures τ with ﬁnite support the Deﬁnitions 1
and 2 are equivalent.
2.3 Properties of majorization
The relation of majorization is a semiordering of the set of all probability
measures, i.e. we have
σ ≻ σ,
σ ≻ τ, τ ≻ µ =⇒ σ ≻ µ.
From Deﬁnition 2 it follows that probability measures which are comparable
with respect to majorization must have equal ﬁrst moments.

PAGE 7
Quantization 7
From Jensen’s inequality it follows that
σ ≻ τ =⇒
∫
f dσ ≥
∫
f dτ (5)
for any convex function f : V → R. (Throughout the following we assume
tacitely that only such convex functions admitted which are dominated from
below by a aﬃne linear function. This guarantees that all integrals are well-
deﬁned.) It follows easily that majorization is identifying, i.e.
σ ≻ τ, τ ≻ σ ⇒ σ = τ.
The main theorem of the theory of majorization is the so-called Dilation
Theorem which is also known as Theorem by Blackwell-Sherman-Stein. This
theorem states that the integral inequalities in (5) are even suﬃcient for
σ ≻ τ.
Theorem 1. (Blackwell, Sherman, Stein) The following assertions are
equivalent:
1. σ ≻ τ.
2.
∫
f dσ ≥
∫
f dτ for all convex functions f : V → R.
The proof of (2)= ⇒ (1) has along history, beginning with Hardy, Little-
wood and Polya (1929). The multivariate version was proved by Blackwell
(1951), Sherman (1951), and Stein (1951). An inﬁnitely dimensional version
for locally convex spaces was proved by V. Strassen (1965).
3 The quantization problem
Let σ be a probability measure which is to be quantized. By
M(σ, m ) = {τ : σ ≻ τ, |supp(τ)| ≤m}
we denote the set of all quantizations of σ supported by at most m points.
Since any quantization causes some loss of information we are interested in
such quantizations which are maximal with respect to majorization.
Deﬁnition 3. A quantization τ ∈ M(σ, m ) is called admissible if it is max-
imal with respect to ≻, i.e. if it is not majorized by any other quantization
in M(σ, m ).
Since majorization deﬁnes only a semiordering we cannot expect that
M(σ, m ) contains a maximum. But it makes sense to look for unsurpassable,
i.e. admissible quantizations.
This program is seemingly diﬀerent from the usual approach to look only
for quantizations which are generated by partitions and which solve particular

PAGE 8
8 Strasser
optimization problems. Popular examples are MSL-Partitions (Bock (1996))
or MSP-Partitions (P¨ otzelberger and Strasser (2000)) where integrals If (τ)
of convex functions f are maximized. Since those methods have turned out
to be very useful for practical purposes it is an important point to show their
distinguished role also in our general quantization framework.
P¨ otzelberger (2000a, 2000b) has obtained a series of results which throw
some light on these problems. In some sense these results provide a com-
plete theoretical solution. Since the proofs are mathematically rather sophis-
ticated, in this paper we can only report some basic conclusions. We would
like to emphasize that, although P¨ otzelberger’s results are formally similar
to A. Wald’s fundamental theorems (complete class theorem, admissibility of
Bayes solutions), they require new proofs of a completely diﬀerent structure.
Suppose that σ is an absolutely continuous distirbution, i.e. σ ≪ λ where
λ denotes the Lebesgue measure. If this assumption is not satisﬁed then the
following statements need some modiﬁcations (see P¨ otzelberger (2000b)).
The ﬁrst result states that admissible quantizations are generated by par-
titions of a particular type.
Theorem 2. (P¨ otzelberger (2000a)) Letσ ≪ λ. For every admissible quan-
tization µ ∈ M(σ, m ) there is a partition B, consisting of at most m convex
polytopes, such that µ = σB.
The second result shows that we need only consider admissible quantiza-
tions.
Theorem 3. (P¨ otzelberger (2000a)) Letσ ≪ λ. For any quantization τ ∈
M(σ, m ) there is an admissible quantization µ ∈ M(σ, m ), such that τ ≺ µ.
The question arises how to construct admissible quantizations. For a con-
vex function f let
Of (σ, m ) :=
{
µ ∈ M(σ, m ) :
∫
f dµ = sup
τ∈M(σ,m )
∫
f dτ
}
.
The set Of (σ, m ) contains those quantizations which are obtained by op-
timizing integrals of convex functions. These are exactly the optimization
problems which have been considered by Bock (1996), and where algorithms
are provided by Bock (1996) and by P¨ otzelberger and Strasser (2000).
Theorem 4. (P¨ otzelberger (2000a)) Letσ ≪ λ and let f be a convex func-
tion which is not the maximum of m − 1 aﬃne linear functions. Then all
quantizations in Of (σ, m ) are admissible in M(σ, m ).
This theorem implies that the optimization problem which is deﬁned by
Of (σ, m ) yields quantizations which are unsurpassable with respect to ma-
jorization.
The last result is concerned with the question whether all admissible
quantizations can be obtained in this way.

PAGE 9
Quantization 9
Theorem 5. (P¨ otzelberger (2000a)) Letσ ≪ λ and let µ ∈ M(σ, m ) be such
that |supp(µ)|= m. The quantization µ is admissible iﬀ there is a sequence
of convex functions fn, none of which is a maximum of m − 1 aﬃne linear
functions, such that
µ = lim
n→∞
µn weakly, where µn ∈ Ofn(σ, m ).
The importance of the results by P¨ otzelberger for the theory of quan-
tization can hardly be overestimated. Morover, these results constitute a
considerable progress in the theory of majorization.
4 Majorization and statistical decision theory
Blackwell (1951) discovered the connection between majorization and statis-
tical decision theory. We refer to Heyer (1982), Strasser (1985), and LeCam
(1986).
Let ( Ω, A) be a measurable space and let ( P1, P 2, . . . , P n) be a vector of
probability measures on A. Then E = ( Ω, A, (P1, P 2, . . . , P n)) is said to be
a statistical experiment of order n. The idea of comparison of experiments
is concerned with the ability of an experiment E to distinguish between the
probability measures ( P1, P 2, . . . , P n) on the basis of statistical data. There
are several possibilities to formalize this ability. In the theory of statistical
experiments it is shown that many of these formalizations are more or less
equivalent to each other. In a most simple way the comparison of experiments
is described by the so-called randomization criterion.
Deﬁnition 4. An experiment E = ( Ω 1, A1, (P1, P 2, . . . , P n)) is more in-
formative than an experiment F = ( Ω 2, A2, (Q1, Q 2, . . . , Q n)), in symbols
E ⊇ F , if there exists a transition probability M from ( Ω 1, A1) to ( Ω 2, A2),
such that Qi = M Pi for every i = 1, 2, . . . , n .
The underlying idea of this deﬁnition is that the probability measures Qi
can be built from the probability measures Pi by an additional random ex-
periment (a so-called randomization), which is independent of the parameter
i, i.e. which is the same for all Pi. Thus, the randomization does not create
any further information on the parameter and therefore it cannot improve
the ability to distinguish between the parameters.
The most simple case of a randomization is given by a reduction of the
experiment E to a smaller ﬁeld C. This reduction is denoted by
E|C:= (Ω, C, (P1, P 2, . . . , P n)).
Obviously, we have E ⊇ E|C.
If for two experiments E and F we have both E ⊇ F and E ⊆ F , then
the experiments are called equivalent, in symbols E ∼ F . The equivalence
E ∼ E|Cis valid iﬀ C is a suﬃcient subﬁeld of A.

PAGE 10
10 Strasser
Experiments are represented by their standard measures. Let
Sn := {x ∈ Rn :
n∑
i=1
xi = 1, x i ≥ 0 if i = 1, 2, . . . , n }
be the standard simplex in Rn.
Deﬁnition 5. The standard measure of the experiment E is deﬁned by
σE : B ↦→
( 1
n
∑
k
Pk
) ( ( dPi
d ∑
k Pk
)
1≤i≤n ∈ B
)
, B ∈ Bn.
Standard measures are probability measures, satisfying σE(Sn) = 1 and
∫
xi σE(dx) = 1
n , 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
Every probability measure on Sn satisfying these conditions is called a stan-
dard measure.
The following theorem states how the statistical decision theory is con-
nected to the theory of majorization.
Theorem 6. (Blackwell (1951)) Let E and F be two experiments of order
n. Then
E ⊇ F ⇔ σE ≻ σF .
This theorem implies that the comparison of experiments can be per-
formed computationally by the comparison of their standard measures in
terms of majorization. The dilation theorem yields the following corollary.
Corollary 1. Let E and F be two experiments of order n. Then we have
E ⊇ F iﬀ ∫
f dσE ≥
∫
f dσF (6)
for all convex functions f : Rn → R.
Thus, the integrals of convex functions with respect to standard measures
are isotonic functions with respect to the information ordering of experiments.
In case of dichotomies the standard measures may be replaced by the distri-
butions of the likelihood ratios.
Corollary 2. Let E = (P1, P 2) and F = (Q1, Q 2) be two dichotomies. Then
we have E ⊇ F iﬀ
∫
f
( dP2
dP1
)
dP1 ≥
∫
f
( dQ2
dQ1
)
dQ1 (7)
for all convex functions f : R → R.

PAGE 11
Quantization 11
Proof. Let f : [0, ∞ ] → R be any convex function. Then it is easy to see that
g : (x1, x 2) ↦− →f
( x1
x2
)
x2
is a convex function on [0 , ∞ )2. Hence, the inequality (6) applied for g implies
(7).
Let conversely be g : R2 → R be an arbitrary convex function. W.l.g.
assume that g(1, 0) = 0. Deﬁne
f (t) := g
( t
1 + t , 1
1 + t
)
(1 + t), t ∈ [0, ∞ ].
Again it is easy to see that f is a convex function. From (7) it follows that
(6) is valid for g.
The integrals in (7) are called f -divergences. The best known examples
of f -divergences are the Kullback-Leibler information with f (x) = x log(x),
the Hellinger-distance with f (x) = 1 − √x, and the total variation with
f (x) = ( x − 1)+.
The f -divergences are also isotonic functions of the information semiorder-
ing of experiments and are thus interpreted as information measures.
5 Reduction of complexity and majorization
Let us turn to the problem how to obtain optimal reductions of statistical
experiments to ﬁnite subﬁelds. We will show that an optimal quantization
of the standard measure will give an optimal reduction of the underlying
experiment. This will provide also a theoretical justiﬁcation of the approach
by Bock (1996).
To begin with we recall that any ﬁnite partition generates a ﬁnite ﬁeld,
and that, conversely, each ﬁnite ﬁeld is generated by a ﬁnite partition. Thus,
we may identify ﬁnite ﬁelds and ﬁnite partitions.
Deﬁnition 6. An experiment F is of complexity ≤ m, if there exists an
equivalent experiment G, whose ﬁeld is generated by a partition with at
most m subsets.
Our view of a reduction of complexity of a statistical experiment E will
be the following: The experiment E is to be replaced by another experiment
F , which can be obtained from the original one, i.e. E ⊇ F , and which is of
complexity ≤ m. Given these side conditions we are looking for a reduced
experiment F which is most informative. Moreover, for practical reasons, we
would like to obtain a reduced experiment F of the form F = E|C, where C
is a subﬁeld of A which is generated by m subsets.
The ﬁrst lemma shows how the complexity of the experiment is related
to properties of the standard measure.

PAGE 12
12 Strasser
Lemma 1. An experiment F is of complexity ≤ m iﬀ the standard measure
τ = σF is supported by at most m points.
Proof. Let F be an experiment of complexity ≤ m. W.l.g. let
F = ( Ω, C, (Q1, Q 2, . . . , Q n)), where C is generated by a partition
(C1, C 2, . . . , C m). Then the standard measure is given by σF = ∑
k wkδtk ,
where wk = ( 1
n
∑
j Qj)(Ck) and
tk =
( Qi(Ck)∑
j Qj(Ck)
)
1≤i≤n
.
Conversely, let τ = ∑ m
k1
wkδtk be a standard measure on Sn. We have to show
that there exists an experiment having this standard measure and which is
of complexity ≤ m.
The solution is the so-called standard experiment of τ. We deﬁne Ω :=
{t1, t 2, . . . , t m}, A to be the power set of Ω , and
Qi : A ↦→n
∫
A
xiτ(dx), 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
Then it is easy to see that the experiment deﬁned in this way has the standard
measure τ.
It follows that the standard measures of experiments which are obtained
from E by a reduction of complexity, are exactly the quantizations of the
standard measure σE and therefore can be described by the set
M(σE, m ) = {τ : τ ≺ σE, |supp(τ)| ≤m}.
In this way we have translated the complexity reduction of experiments into
the quantization of standard measures.
For dichotomies the standard measure can be transformed into the dis-
tribution of the likelihood ratio. Therefore, the complexity reduction of a
dichotomy is equivalent to the quantization of the distribution of the likeli-
hood ratio.
The next question we have to discuss is how to quantize the standard
measure. It is natural to apply one of the Corollaries 1 or 2. The idea of Bock
(1996) is to choose a convex function f and then to quantize the distribution
of the likelihood ratio of a dichotomy by maximizing the f -divergence. For
experiments of order n this corresponds to choosing a convex function f and
quantizing the standard measure σ by maximizing If (σB). We will show that
this approach can be justiﬁed by principles of statistical decision theory.
Since both majorization of standard measures and information com-
parison of experiments are semiorderings, we cannot expect that the set
M(σE, m ) contains a maximum. However, it makes sense to look for maximal
elements in M(σE, m ).

PAGE 13
Quantization 13
Deﬁnition 7. An experiment F ⊆ E of complexity ≤ m is called admissible
in M(σE, m ), if F is maximal in M(σE, m ), i.e. if there is no other experiment
G of complexity ≤ m such that F ⫋ G ⊆ E.
From the results of P¨ otzelberger (2000a and 2000b) discussed in Section
3 it follows how to obtain maximal standard measures in M(σE, m ): Choose
a convex function f and maximize If (τ) for τ ∈ M(σE, m ).
Theorem 7. Let f be a convex function on Sn. If τ ∈ M(σE, m ) is a stan-
dard measure satisfying
∫
f dτ = sup
µ∈M(σE ,m )
∫
f dµ,
then any experiment F whose standard measure is τ, is admissible with a
complexity ≤ m.
The results of P¨ otzelberger imply that in this way we may approximate
all admissible complexity reductions of E.
Thus it is shown that the quantization of standard measures by maximizing
integrals of convex functions constitutes the general solution of the problem
of reduction of complexity for statistical experiments.
Another consequence of the results by P¨ otzelberger is that any admissible
standard measure τ is of the form τ = σB
E where B is a partition consisting of
m polytopes. In P¨ otzelberger and Strasser (2000) algorithms are investigated
which allow to compute these partitions in an constructive way. In this way
we even obtain a constructive representation of the partition C to which the
original experiment is to be reduced.
Corollary 3. Let τ = σB
E be optimal in the sense of Theorem 7. Then the
subsets
Cj :=
{( dPi
d ∑
k Pk
)
1≤i≤n
∈ Bj
}
, j = 1, 2, . . . , m,
deﬁne a partition C, such that F := E|Chas the standard measure τ and is
an admissible reduction of complexity of E of complexity ≤ m.
A ﬁnal question is how to choose the convex function f which is used for
the quantization of σE. Our last theorem indicates that any Bayes decision
problem determines a convex function which may be used for the quantization
of the standard measure. Further ideas for the choice of the convex function
f are contained in Strasser (2000b).
Theorem 8. Let D = {1, 2, . . . , r }be a ﬁnite decision space, Ui(j) the utility
of the decision j in state i, and let (α1, α 2, . . . , α n) be a prior distribution.
If U (ρ) denotes the Bayesian utility of a decison function ρ for that deci-
sion problem then we have
sup
ρ
U (ρ) = n
∫
f dσE,

PAGE 14
14 Strasser
where f denotes the convex function
f (x) := max
j
n∑
i=1
αiUi(j)xi, x ∈ Rn.
Proof. Let ρj(ω) the probabilites for the randomized decision function ρ to
decide in favour of j if ω was observed. Then the Bayesian utility of ρ is given
by
R(ρ) =
n∑
i=1
r∑
j=1
αiUi(j)
∫
ρj dPi
=
∫ n∑
i=1
r∑
j=1
αiUi(j)ρj
dPi
d ∑
k Pk
d
∑
k
Pk.
If we deﬁne
j(ω) := argmax j
n∑
i=1
αiUi(j) dPi
d ∑
k Pk
(ω),
then the Bayes decision function is
ρ∗
j (ω) :=
{ 1 if j = j(ω),
0 if j ̸= j(ω).
For the optimal Bayesian utility it follows that
R(ρ∗) =
∫
max
j
( n∑
i=1
αiUi(j) dPi
d ∑
k Pk
)
d
∑
k
Pk
= n
∫
max
j
( n∑
i=1
αiUi(j)xi
)
σE(dx)
= n
∫
f dσE.
References
BLACKWELL, D. (1951): Comparison of experiments. In L. LeCam and J. Ney-
man, editors, Proc. 2nd Berkeley Symp. Math. Statistics Prob. , 93–102.
BLACKWELL, D. (1953): Equivalent comparisons of experiments. Ann. Math.
Statistics, 24, 265–272.
BOCK, H.H. (1996): Probability models and hypotheses testing in partitioning
cluster analysis. In P. Arabie, Hubert L. J., and G. De Soete, editors, Clustering
and Classiﬁcation , 377–453. World Scientiﬁc Publ., River Edge, NJ.
HARDY, G.H., LITTLEWOOD, J.E., POLYA, G. (1929): Some simple inequalities
satisﬁed by convex functions. Messenger Math. , 58, 145–152.
HEYER, H. (1982): Theory of Statistical Experiments . Springer, New York.

PAGE 15
Quantization 15
LECAM, L. (1964): Suﬃciency and approximate suﬃciency. Ann. Math. Statist. ,
35, 1419–1455.
LECAM, L. (1986): Asymptotic Methods in Statistical Decision Theory . Springer,
New York.
MARSHALL, A.W., OLKIN, I. (1979): Inequalities:theory of majorization and its
applications. Academic Press.
P ¨OTZELBERGER, K. (2000a): Admissible unbiased quantizations: Distributions
without linear components. Technical report, Department of Statistics, Vienna
University of Economics and Business Administration.
P ¨OTZELBERGER, K. (2000b): Admissible unbiased quantizations: Distributions
with linear components. Technical report, Department of Statistics, Vienna
University of Economics and Business Administration.
P ¨OTZELBERGER, K., STRASSER, H. (2000): Clustering and quantization by
MSP-partitions. To appear in: Statistics and Decisions .
SHERMAN, S. (1951): On a theorem of Hardy, Littlewood, Polya and Blackwell.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. , 37, 826–831.
STEIN, S. (1951): Notes on the comparison of experiments.
STEINER, G. (1999): Quantization and clustering with maximal information: Algo-
rithms and numerical experiments . PhD thesis, Vienna University of Economics
and Business Administration.
STRASSEN, V. (1965): The existence of probability measures with given marginals.
Ann. Math. Statist. , 36, 423–439.
STRASSER, H. (1985): Mathematical theory of statistics: Statistical experiments
and asymptotic decision theory . Volume 7 of De Gruyter Studies in Mathemat-
ics. Walter de Gruyter, Berlin.
STRASSER, H. (2000a): Data compression and statistical inference. In T. Kollo, ed-
itor, Proceedings ofthe 6th Tartu Conference on Multivariate Statistics (Satel-
lite meeting of ISI 52nd session) .
STRASSER, H. (2000b): Reduction of complexity. In J.A. Mazanec and H. Strasser,
editors, A nonparametric approach to perceptions-based market segmentation:
foundations. Volume 1 of Interdisciplinary Studies in Economics and Manage-
ment. Springer, Berlin, 2000.
TORGERSEN, E.N. (1979): Comparison of experiments when the parameter space
is ﬁnite. Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie verw. Geb. , 16, 219–249.
TORGERSEN, E.N. (1991): Comparison of statistical experiments . Cambridge
Univ. Press.