Point Processes with Gaussian Boson Sampling
Soran Jahangiri, Juan Miguel Arrazola, Nicol´ as Quesada, and Nathan Killoran
Xanadu, 777 Bay Street, Toronto, Canada
Random point patterns are ubiquitous in nature, and statistical models such as point processes,
i.e., algorithms that generate stochastic collections of points, are commonly used to simulate and
interpret them. We propose an application of quantum computing to statistical modeling by
establishing a connection between point processes and Gaussian Boson Sampling, an algorithm for
special-purpose photonic quantum computers. We show that Gaussian Boson Sampling can be
used to implement a class of point processes based on hard-to-compute matrix functions which, in
general, are intractable to simulate classically. We also discuss situations where polynomial-time
classical methods exist. This leads to a family of eﬃcient quantum-inspired point processes,
including a new fast classical algorithm for permanental point processes. We investigate the
statistical properties of point processes based on Gaussian Boson Sampling and reveal their deﬁning
property: like bosons that bunch together, they generate collections of points that form clusters.
Finally, we discuss several additional properties of these point processes which we illustrate with
example applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
Despite their stochastic nature, quantum algorithms
have often been studied in contexts where their intrinsic
randomness is an obstacle rather than a beneﬁt. For
instance, consider Shor’s factoring algorithm: it con-
structs states such that, with high probability, their
measurement outcomes can be post-processed to reveal
the prime factors of an input composite number [1].
The quantum computer is acting as a sampler whose
probability distribution is highly concentrated on out-
comes that reveal the solution to the factoring problem.
However, it would be preferable to obtain the desired
answers with certainty rather than with high probability.
Other quantum algorithms can also be viewed in this
light: Grover’s search algorithm samples outputs that
are likely to contain a marked item in an unstructured
database [2]; the quantum algorithm for linear systems
of equations randomly outputs large elements of the
solution vector [3]; and the quantum approximate opti-
mization algorithm reveals bit strings that have a high
chance of being good approximations to the solution of
combinatorial optimization problems [4]. Nevertheless,
randomness in quantum algorithms can be harnessed and
turned into a feature when applied to the right problems.
Stochastic processes occur in abundance in nature
as well as in human aﬀairs, and understanding them
requires building models that can reproduce their unique
random properties. This is, in essence, the goal of
statistical modeling: to build accurate mathematical
representations of random processes [5]. Point processes
are statistical models that generate random collections of
data points according to a given probability distribution
[6–9]. Similarly, point process analysis is a quantitative
statistical method for analyzing such point patterns
to provide information that can be used for prediction
and planning purposes [10]. This ﬁnds applications in
a variety of ﬁelds such as ﬁnance [11–14], seismology
[15–17], biology [18–20], medicine [21–23], ecology
[24–28], physics [29–32], and chemistry [33–37].
Several point processes are based on probability distri-
butions that select points according to matrix functions.
An example is the determinantal point process (DPP)
[38–40], which, as the name suggests, is based on the de-
terminant as the underlying matrix function. DPPs have
been studied in depth by the mathematics community
[41–50] and have found a large number of applications,
notably in machine learning [51–55] and optimization
[56–60]. The wide adoption of DPPs is partially due to
the fact that determinants can be eﬃciently calculated,
leading to fast implementations of DPPs. The same
is not true for other matrix point processes: even if
they are of great potential interest, they ﬁnd limited
usage due to the hardness of their numerical deployment.
In this work, we introduce a new class of point pro-
cesses – the hafnian and Torontonian point processes
(HPPs and TPPs) – and show that they can be natively
implemented using a special-purpose photonic quantum
algorithm known as Gaussian Boson Sampling (GBS).
The hafnian is a generalization of the permanent, and in-
deed HPPs contain permanental point processes [61, 62]
as a special case. While DPPs generate points that are
scattered – like fermions obeying the Pauli exclusion prin-
ciple – HPPs and TPPs sample points that are clustered
– like bosons that bunch together. In the most general
case, implementing these point processes using classical
methods cannot be done in polynomial time. However,
for speciﬁc instances, eﬃcient classical simulation algo-
rithms exist, which give rise to a new class of quantum-
inspired point processes. We demonstrate the cluster-
ing property of these point processes through qualitative
and quantitative analyses, and explore their usefulness
by studying potential applications.
arXiv:1906.11972v1  [quant-ph]  27 Jun 2019
2
  
FIG. 1: An illustration of a random point pattern in a hon-
eycomb. The sealed yellow cells contain developing bees and
the dark holes are empty cells that have been randomly va-
cated. The appearance of empty cells can be modeled as a
point process generating clusters of points in the hexagonal
lattice.
II. BACKGROUND
For completeness, we provide a brief background of
both point processes and GBS.
A. Point Processes
Random point patterns occur ubiquitously in nature
and human aﬀairs. This is illustrated for example in
Fig. 1, where we show a random pattern of empty cells
in a honeycomb. Point processes provide a method
to model and analyze these random patterns as well
as the mechanisms that underlie them. Informally, a
point process is a mechanism that randomly generates
points among a set of possible outcomes. More precisely,
a point process P is a probability distribution over
subsets of a given state space M. We focus on discrete
point processes, in which case the state space can be
enumerated by a ﬁnite set M = {1,...,m} containing
m members, and the distribution P is deﬁned over the
power set 2M, the set of all 2 m possible subsets of M.
Each subset ofM is denoted byS⊆M . A point process
is thus uniquely speciﬁed by the choice of distribution P
and state spaceM.
In a uniformly random point process, P is a uniform
distribution over all subsets of M. When the number
of points in such a random point process is restricted to
follow a Poisson distribution with a constant intensity
rate, the resulting point process is a homogeneous
Poisson point process (PPP). In a PPP, the probability
P is uniform over all outputs with an equal number of
points. A PPP can be considered as a point process
with no interaction between the points and therefore
is likely to contain both local clusters and voids. The
term interaction here refers to the eﬀect that a point
at a speciﬁc location might have on the appearance of
points in other locations. A natural way to generate
other types of point processes is to introduce some
level of interaction between the points, which may favor
clustering or scattering. An important class of such
point processes are formed by relating the probability
of observing a particular output pattern to matrix
functions such as determinants and permanents.
We deﬁne a matrix point process as a point process
where the probability P(S) of observing an outcome S
takes the form
P(S) = Φ(KS)
N , (1)
where K is an m×m symmetric kernel matrix , KS :=
[Ki,j]i,j∈S is a submatrix of K obtained by keeping rows
and columns corresponding to the outcome S, Φ is a ma-
trix function, with both Φ and K chosen to ensure that
Φ(KS)≥ 0 for all S ∈ 2M, and N is a normalization
constant. Speciﬁc classes of matrix point processes are
determined by the choice of matrix function and, among
each class, the properties of the resulting point process
are uniquely determined by the choice of kernel matrix.
For instance, a determinantal point process (DPP) is de-
ﬁned by the distribution [54]
P(S) = det(KS)
det(K + 1 ), (2)
where 1 is the identity matrix. Instead of the full prob-
ability distribution, it is often more convenient to work
with then-point correlation function of matrix point pro-
cesses. For a given subset r = (r1,...,r n)⊆M with
n≤m, it is deﬁned as [63]
ρn(r1,...,r n) = Φ(Kri,rj)i,j=1,...,n. (3)
The correlation function is the unnormalized probabil-
ity of observing the output (r1,...,r n) appearing among
the elements of a sample S drawn from P. Therefore,
it quantiﬁes the likelihood that these points appear to-
gether when generating samples from the matrix point
process. For example, the correlation function of a DPP
for two points in the state space, referred to as the 2-point
correlation function, is given by
ρ2(r1,r 2) =Kr1,r1Kr2,r2− (Kr1,r2)2, (4)
where we have used the fact that the kernel matrix is
symmetric. If K measures similarity between points,
namely if Kri,rj takes large values when ri and rj are
similar to each other, Eq. (4) shows that similar points
are unlikely to occur together, i.e., DPPs lead to diversi-
ﬁcation.
B. Gaussian Boson Sampling
In a quantum-optical setting, the state of a system
of m optical modes can be uniquely speciﬁed by its so-
called Wigner function W (q,p) [64, 65], where q∈ Rm
3
are the so-called canonical positions and p∈ Rm are the
canonical momenta of the state. Gaussian states are the
set of quantum states with Gaussian Wigner functions.
Just like multidimensional Gaussian distributions, Gaus-
sian states are speciﬁed by a covariance matrix V and a
vector of means ¯q, ¯p. Besides being a positive deﬁnite co-
variance matrix, a valid quantum covariance matrix must
satisfy the uncertainty principle
V +i ℏ
2 Ω≥ 0, (5)
where Ω =
( 0 Im
−Im 0
)
is the symplectic matrix and ℏ
is a positive constant. It will be convenient to write
the covariance matrix in terms of the complex ampli-
tudes α = 1√
2ℏ(q + ip) ∈ Cm. The variables α are
said to be complex normal distributed with mean ¯α =
1√
2ℏ(¯q +i¯p)∈ Cm and covariance matrix Σ [66], which
furthermore also needs to satisfy the uncertainty relation
[67]
Σ +Z/2≥ 0, (6)
where Z =
( Im 0
0 −Im
)
. The covariance matrix Σ is cus-
tomarily parameterized as [66]
Σ =
(
Γ C
C∗ Γ∗
)
, (7)
where C is symmetric and Γ is hermitian and positive
deﬁnite.
Gaussian Boson Sampling (GBS) is a model of pho-
tonic quantum computing where a Gaussian state is mea-
sured using photon-number-resolving detectors. A gen-
eral Gaussian state can be prepared by using single-mode
squeezing and displacement operations together with
linear-optical interferometry. It was shown in Ref. [68]
that when the modes of a Gaussian state with zero mean
(α = 0) are measured, the probability of obtaining a pat-
tern of photons S = (s1,...,s m), where si is the number
of photons in mode i, is given by
P(S) = 1√
det(σQ)
Haf(KS)
s1!...s m!, (8)
where
σQ := Σ + I2m/2, (9)
K :=X
(
I2m−σ−1
Q
)
, (10)
andKS is the matrix obtained by repeating columns and
rowsi andi+M of the kernel matrixK a number of times
equal to si. If si = 0 then the rows and columns i and
i +M are deleted from K in order to form KS. The
matrix function Haf(·) is the hafnian [69] which, for a
2m× 2m matrix K, is deﬁned as
Haf(K) =
∑
µ∈PMP
∏
(i,j)∈µ
Ki,j, (11)
where PMP is the set of perfect matching permuta-
tions, namely the possible ways of partitioning the
set {1,..., 2m} into subsets of size 2. The hafnian
is #P-Hard to approximate for worst-case instances
[70] and the runtime of the best known algorithms
for computing hafnians scales exponentially with the
dimension of the input matrix [71]. The diﬃculty of
computing the hafnian has been used to show that
sampling from general GBS distributions cannot be
done in classical polynomial time unless the polynomial
hierarchy collapses [68, 72].
In GBS, it is possible that more than one photon can
be observed in a given output mode, i.e., it is possible
that si > 1. In certain cases, only the location of the
detected photons is relevant — not their quantity at a
given mode — so it becomes convenient to set si = 1
for any si > 1. Physically, this is precisely the eﬀect of
threshold detectors: they ‘click’ whenever one or more
photons are observed. It was shown in Ref. [73] that
the resulting GBS distribution when employing threshold
detectors is given by
P(S) = 1√
det(σQ)
Tor (XKS), (12)
where X =
(
0 1 |S|
1 |S| 0
)
and Tor(·) is the Torontonian,
which for a 2m× 2m matrix K is deﬁned as
Tor(K) =
∑
Z∈2M
(−1)|Z| 1√
det(1 −KZ)
, (13)
whereM ={1, 2,...,m } and 2M denotes its powerset.
III. POINT PROCESSES WITH GAUSSIAN
BOSON SAMPLING
Once the mathematical concepts of point processes
and GBS have been placed alongside each other, their
connection is evident: a GBS device is a physical
realization of a matrix point process. A schematic
illustration of this connection is shown in Fig. 2. In this
section, we make that connection explicit and analyze
the properties of the resulting point process.
For any positive integerm, consider a state space con-
sisting of vectors (s1,s 2,...,s m) such that each entry si
is a non-negative integer and the sum of all entries is an
even number, i.e., ∑n
i=1si mod 2 = 0. We deﬁne a haf-
nian point process (HPP) by the probability distribution
P(S) = 1√
det(σQ)
Haf(KS)
s1!...s m!, (14)
where K is a 2 m× 2m symmetric kernel matrix. An
HPP is therefore simply a matrix point process with the
4
hafnian as the matrix function.
The hafnian is a generalization of the permanent, in
the sense that the permanent of an arbitrary matrix K
can be expressed in terms of the hafnian of a related
matrix using the identity
per(K) = Haf
(
0 K
KT 0
)
. (15)
Consequently, HPPs generalize permanental point pro-
cesses: they contain them as a special case. Similarly,
for a state space M ={1, 2,...,m }, we deﬁne a Toron-
tonian point process (TPP) by the distribution
P(S) = Tor(KS)√
det(σQ)
. (16)
We refer to both HPPs and TPPs as GBS point pro-
cesses. We now study suﬃcient conditions to embed spe-
ciﬁc types of kernel matrices into a GBS device.
A. Kernel matrices
Williamson’s theorem [74] combined with the Bloch-
Messiah reduction [75] provide a recipe to prepare an
arbitrary Gaussian quantum state by using combinations
of single-mode squeezing, single-mode displacements,
and linear optics interferometers [65]. In general, to
encode a given matrix into a GBS device, the conditions
are that the covariance matrix Σ satisﬁes the uncer-
tainty relation of Eq. (6) and that the kernel matrix K
is deﬁned in terms of Σ according to Eq. (10).
Following Ref. [76], we consider circuits that take as
inputs single-mode Gaussian states characterized by a
diagonal covariance matrix Vi = diag
(
V (i)
q ,V (i)
p
)
in the
qi,pi variables. In order to satisfy the uncertainty rela-
tion in Eq. (5) the variances must satisfy
V (i)
q V (i)
p ≥ (ℏ/2)2. (17)
A state that has both V (i)
q ≥ ℏ/2 and V (i)
p ≥ ℏ/2 will
be termed “classical”, since both of its variances have
ﬂuctuations above the noise of the vacuum state, ℏ/2.
Having prepared the inputs, single-mode Gaussian
states are sent through a linear-optical interferometer,
which physically corresponds to an array of half-silvered
mirrors and waveplates and enables generation of entan-
glement between the diﬀerent modes. Mathematically,
an interferometer can be uniquely described by a unitary
matrixU with dimension equal to the number of modes.
With this description we can explicitly construct the co-
variance matrix of the output or, more interestingly, we
can directly construct the kernel matrix K appearing in
Eq. (10), which is given by:
K =
[
B C
C∗ B∗
]
=KT, (18)
where
C =U diag(µ1,µ 2,...,µ m)U† =C†, (19)
B =U diag(λ1,λ 2,...,λ m)UT =BT, (20)
µi = 1−
(
1
1 + 2V (i)
q /ℏ
+ 1
1 + 2V (i)
p /ℏ
)
, (21)
λi = 1
1 + 2V (i)
p /ℏ
− 1
1 + 2V (i)
q /ℏ
. (22)
Now we consider in detail certain choices of input states
and the resulting kernel matrices.
1. Squeezed states
For squeezed states with squeezing level r, one of the
quadratures, say V (i)
p = ℏ
2e−2ri, is squeezed below the
vacuum level while the other quadrature is antisqueezed
by exactly the opposite amount V (i)
q = ℏ
2e2ri. Under
these circumstances it holds that µi = 0, λi = tanh(ri),
and
Ksq =
[
B 0
0 B∗
]
. (23)
The matrix B can be an arbitrary symmetric matrix ex-
cept for the restriction that its singular values must sat-
isfy λi = tanh(ri) ∈ [0, 1). To see this, consider the
Takagi-Autonne decomposition [77–79] of any complex
symmetric matrix, given by
B =U diag(λ1,λ 2,...,λ m)UT. (24)
The values λi ≥ 0 are the singular values of V and
the Takagi-Autonne decomposition is therefore just a
ﬁne-tuned version of the singular value decomposition
for symmetric matrices. Assuming λi < 1 then we can
always write tanh(ri) =λi.
In the case of squeezed input states, the GBS proba-
bility distribution satisﬁes
P(S) = 1√
det(σQ)
|Haf(BS)|2
s1!...s m! . (25)
This formula therefore states that hafnian point pro-
cesses can be designed for any complex symmetric kernel
matrix B.
The average number of points generated by a GBS
point process can be controlled by suitably rescaling the
5
r1
r2
r3
r4
r5
r6
r7
r8
r9
r10
r11
r12
r13
r14
r15
r16
1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8
9 10 11 12
13 14 15 16
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
U 
FIG. 2: Schematic illustration of a point process implemented with GBS. A symmetric kernel matrix K can be encoded by
appropriately selecting the squeezing levels r1,r 2,...,r m and the interferometer unitary U. Each point in the state space is
associated with an output mode such that the modes where photons are observed determine the speciﬁc point pattern that has
been sampled.
kernel matrix: K → cK, where c > 0 is a constant.
Letting N denote the number of points generated, the
average number of points E(N) satisﬁes
E(N) =
m∑
i=1
(cλi)2
1− (cλi)2, (26)
which can be solved forc to set any desired average num-
ber of points.
2. Thermal states
Single-mode thermal states are characterized by a co-
variance matrix satisfying V (i)
p = V (i)
q = ℏ
(
¯ni + 1
2
)
,
where ¯ni is the mean photon number of mode i. For
these states we also have µi = ¯ni
1+¯ni
, ¯ni≥ 0, λi = 0, and
Kth =
[
0 C
CT 0
]
, (27)
C =U diag(µ1,µ 2,...,µ m)U. (28)
Except for proportionality constants, the matrix C can
be made proportional to an arbitrary positive semideﬁ-
nite complex matrix sinceµi≥ 0 in Eq. (19). Finally, us-
ing Eq. (15), we conclude that a GBS device with thermal
states as input can be used to sample from a permanental
point process characterized by the distribution
P(S) = 1√
det(σQ)
per(CS)
s1!...s m!, (29)
where C is an arbitrary positive semideﬁnite kernel ma-
trix. The average number of points in this case satisﬁes
E(N) =
m∑
i=1
cµi
1−cµi
, (30)
where c is the rescaling constant of the kernel matrix.
3. Squashed states
Squashed states are single-mode states with the prop-
erty that the variance in both position and momentum
are above vacuum ﬂuctuations, i.e., V (i)
q ,V (i)
p ≥ ℏ/2 and
V (i)
p ⁄= V (i)
q . They diﬀer from squeezed states, where
one quadrature has below-vacuum ﬂuctuations, and from
thermal states, where V (i)
p =V (i)
q . We consider the spe-
ciﬁc situation where V (i)
q = ℏ/2 for all i, in which case
µi =λi = 1
2− 1
1 + 2V (i)
p /ℏ
. (31)
We parameterize V (i)
p = ℏ
2 exp(2ri) with ri≥ 0 and re-
strict the interferometer such that it is characterized by
a real orthogonal matrix O. We then have:
C =B = 1
2O diag(λ1,λ 2,...,λ m) OT, (32)
Ksqsh =
[
C C
C C
]
. (33)
Except for proportionality constants, the matrix C can
be chosen to be an arbitrary positive semideﬁnite real
matrix. This gives rise to an HPP with probability dis-
tribution
P(S) = 1√
det(σQ)
Haf(Ksqsh,S)
s1!...s m! . (34)
The average number of points satisﬁes
E(N) =
m∑
i=1
(2cλi)
1− (2cλi), (35)
where as before, c is the rescaling constant of the kernel
matrix.
B. Quantum-inspired point processes
In general, the probability distribution of Eq. (14)
cannot be sampled from in classical polynomial time,
6
in which case photonic quantum devices are needed
to implement GBS point processes. Nevertheless, as
we now show, for kernel matrices satisfying speciﬁc
properties, the resulting point processes can be imple-
mented in polynomial time using classical computers.
The resulting algorithms are eﬃciently-implementable
quantum-inspired classical point processes. The main
idea is that classical Gaussian states, i.e., states whose
variances are above vacuum level for both quadratures,
can be represented in terms of probability distributions
over states whose interaction through linear-optical
interferometers can be straightforwardly computed.
Similarly to the Wigner function, any single-mode
quantum state τ can be uniquely represented in terms
of the so-called P representation
τ =
∫
C
d2α P(α)|α⟩⟨α|, (36)
where|α⟩⟨α| represents a coherent state with parameter
α. Coherent states are Gaussian states with variances
V (i)
q =V (i)
p = ℏ/2 and complex amplitude α. The func-
tionP (α) is a quasi-probability distribution in the sense
that it can take negative values, but there exist states for
which it is positive over its entire domain. In such cases,
the right-hand side of Eq. (36) can be interpreted as a
probability distribution over coherent states. Following
a result of Ref. [76], if a single-mode Gaussian state τ
is classical, i.e., with variances V (i)
p ,V (i)
q ≥ ℏ/2, then it
has a positive P function. This includes thermal states
and squashed states, whose P functions are respectively
given by
Pth(α) = 1
π¯n exp
(
−α2
R +α2
I
¯n
)
, (37)
Psqsh(α) = δ(αR)√
π(e2r− 1)/2
exp
(
− α2
I
(e2r− 1)/2
)
, r ≥ 0,
(38)
where αR,αI are respectively the real and imaginary
parts of α and δ(α) is the Dirac delta function. States
with a positive P representation can be prepared by
sampling the random variable α with probability den-
sity function P (α) and then preparing the resulting
state|α⟩⟨α|. If the inputs of an m-mode interferom-
eter characterized by a unitary U are independent co-
herent states with parametersα1,α 2,...,α m, the output
states are also independent coherent states with param-
eters β1,β 2,...,β m, where
βi =
m∑
j=1
Ujiαj. (39)
Finally, the photon number distribution of a coherent
state with parameter β is a Poisson distribution with
mean|β|2, so a sample photon pattern can be obtained
by sampling each mode independently according to its
Poisson distribution.
In summary, the classical sampling algorithm for Gaus-
sian states with positive P representation works as fol-
lows:
1. For each modei = 1, 2,...,m with input stateτi =∫
Cd2α Pi(αi)|αi⟩⟨αi|, sample αi according to the
distribution Pi(αi).
2. For each mode, compute the output parameterβi =∑m
j=1Ujiαj and sample the photon numbersi from
a Poisson distribution with mean |βi|2.
3. Return the sample S = (si,s 2,...,s m).
For thermal and squashed states, the distributions P (α)
of Eqs. (37) and (38) are Gaussian in the parameters
αR,αI, so this sampling can be done in O(1) time for
each mode. Similarly, sampling from Poisson distribu-
tions can be done in O(1) for each mode. The overhead
of the algorithm arises from the complexity of computing
the parameters β, which in total takes only O(m2) time.
Importantly, as shown in Eq. (29), GBS with thermal
states gives rise to a permanental point process for posi-
tive semideﬁnite and real kernel matrices. Our method is
thus an eﬃcient algorithm for implementing these perma-
nental point processes, running in O(m2) time. By con-
trast, known algorithms for implementing determinantal
point processes [54] rely on diagonalization of the m×m
kernel matrix, which takes O(m3) time.
IV. PROPER TIES OF GBS POINT PROCESSES
We now investigate the general properties of GBS point
processes. Following the discussion in Section II A, the
correlation function of an HPP is deﬁned as
ρn(r1,...,r 2n) = Haf[Kri,rj], (40)
where 2n refers to the number of points generated by the
HPP. Similarly, the 2-point correlation function is
ρ2(r1,r 2) = Haf
[
Kr1,r1 Kr1,r2
Kr2,r1 Kr2,r2
]
=Kr1,r2. (41)
According to Eq. (41), when the kernel matrix is con-
structed to quantify the similarity between the points,
HPP selects pairs of similar points with higher proba-
bility. Note that Kr1,r2 ≥ 0 for all valid kernel ma-
trices. This indicates that, as expected, HPPs sample
points that are clustered together, i.e., are more similar,
with higher probability. The same clustering property
also holds for TPPs, since the coarse-graining that maps
HPPs to TPPs leaves the interaction between neighbour-
ing points unaﬀected. Implementing point processes with
this form of collective clustering can be done natively
7
  
DPP(a) PPP(b) TPP(c)
FIG. 3: Samples generated with (a) determinantal, (b) Poisson, and (c) Torontonian spatial point processes in a two-dimensional
space containing 100 points. DPP samples have points that are scattered and spread out in space. PPPs treat all patterns
uniformly, so both clustering and repulsion are typically present. For TPPs, sample points are likely to occur in clusters.
with GBS and, in special cases, with quantum-inspired
methods. In this section, we explore the properties of
the GBS point processes by studying the role of diﬀerent
types of state spaces and kernel matrices in the context
of example applications.
A. Homogeneous state spaces
We study spatial point processes where the state
space is a set of points distributed uniformly in a two-
dimensional space and the kernel matrix has elements
given by [80]
Ki,j =e−‖ri−rj‖2/σ2
, (42)
where ri = (xi,yi) is the coordinate vector of the i-th
point andσ is a parameter of the model. In this scenario,
FIG. 4: Normalized distributions of the nearest-neighbour
distance for (a) determinantal, (b) Poisson, and (c) Toronto-
nian spatial point processes in a two-dimensional space con-
taining 100 points. We set a value of σ = 1 for the kernel
matrix parameter in Eq. (42). The statistics were taken over
ten independent samples and the error bars correspond to one
standard deviation. For DPPs, the most common nearest-
neighbour distance is noticeably larger than those for PPPs
and TPPs, showcasing the scattering property of DPPs. Con-
versely, the signiﬁcant majority of TPP points have their
nearest-neighbour at the closest possible distances, a signal
of the clustering property of this point process.
similarity is determined in terms of spatial proximity:
points that are close to each other are assigned large
entries in the kernel matrix, with similarity decaying
exponentially with distance. Now, we compare and
analyze the statistical properties of the patterns that
appear when employing determinantal, Poisson, and
Torontonian point processes. Here and throughout the
rest of the paper, DPPs are implemented using the
algorithm of Ref. [54], and TPPs are implemented by
employing the GBS simulation algorithm of Ref. [73].
As discussed previously, because the points generated
with the PPP are distributed uniformly, both clustered
and dispersed groups of points are equally likely to
be observed. Conversely, the DPP point patterns are
scattered over the whole state space, while the TPP
points form well-deﬁned clusters. Fig. 3 illustrates
typical samples from each of these point processes,
which reﬂect their expected behaviour. More exam-
ples of such point patterns are provided in the Appendix.
Numerical evidence of the clustering properties of
TPPs can be obtained by analyzing the distributions
of the nearest-neighbour distances, N(r), which charac-
terize the probability of ﬁnding the closest neighbour
of a point at a distance r. In Fig. 4, we report the
empirical frequencies of nearest-neighbour distances
for the determinantal, Poisson, and Torontonian point
processes over 10 samples. The N(r) for the TPP
has a peak at the smallest possible distances between
neighbours, showing that a large fraction of the points
generated by the TPP have at least one neighbour in the
closest possible position on the discrete state space. The
N(r) curve drops signiﬁcantly for larger distances due
to the small probability of observing scattered points in
the TPP samples. The N(r) obtained for the DPP has
a peak at a relatively large distance because the points
generated by a DPP repel each other. The PPP N(r)
is more uniform, compared to the TPP one, due to the
comparable probability of ﬁnding points at small and
large distances from each other.
8
FIG. 5: Examples of Voronoi cell diagrams for points obtained from (a) determinantal, (b) Poisson, and (c) Torontonian point
processes in a two-dimensional space containing 100 points. We set a value of σ = 1 for the kernel matrix parameter in
Eq. (42). DPPs lead to Voronoi cells that have comparable areas, whereas TPPs lead to cells that have either small areas
(around clusters) or very large areas (in between clusters). The PPP cells are also inhomegeneous but the level of size variation
is smaller than that in the TPP sample.
These features are also reﬂected in the Voronoi
diagrams of the samples, which are shown in Fig. 5. The
majority of the cells in the DPP diagram have similar
sizes due to the spread-out distribution of the points in
the state space. In the PPP diagram, the homogeneity of
the cell sizes decreases compared to the DPP, and in the
TPP diagram, both very small and very large cell sizes
are observed due to the appearance of point clusters. The
normalized distributions of the areas of the Voronoi cells
computed for 10 samples obtained from these point pro-
cesses are shown in Fig. 6. These distributions provide
further numerical evidence for the lower homogeneity of
the TPP Voronoi cell sizes compared to DPP and PPP
FIG. 6: Normalized distributions of the Voronoi cell areas
for (a) determinantal, (b) Poisson, and (c) Torontonian point
processes in a two-dimensional space containing 100 points.
We set a value of σ = 1 for the kernel matrix parameter in
Eq. (42). The statistics were taken over ten independent sam-
ples and the error bars correspond to one standard deviation.
DPPs have a high peak in the distribution, indicating that
the Voronoi cells have roughly the same area since the points
are scattered evenly. For TPPs, there is a signiﬁcantly large
probability of small cell areas, which is to be expected when
the patterns form several clusters of nearby points. The PPP
distribution reﬂects the intermediate level of inhomogenity in
the PPP cell sizes, compared to the DPP and TPP samples.
results, again due to the clustering of the points in TPPs.
Classical simulation of TPPs is generally intractable
due to the computational hardness of calculating Toron-
tonians of arbitrary kernel matrices. However, since
the kernel matrix of spatial point processes is posi-
tive semideﬁnite, the methods explained in Section III B
for sampling thermal states allow the application of a
quantum-inspired spatial point process for large state
spaces. A typical sample generated with the quantum-
inspired algorithm for permanental point processes
(PerPPs) is presented in Fig. 7 for a larger state space
containing 2500 points, along with the corresponding
DPP and PPP samples. The PerPP indeed generates
clustered point patterns analogous to the TPP ones. This
makes quantum-inspired point processes the preferable
method for eﬃcient modeling of clustered point patterns
for positive-semideﬁnite kernel matrices.
B. Inhomogeneous state spaces
In the case of an inhomogeneous state space, i.e., a
state space where points are not evenly separated, TPPs
with a kernel matrix deﬁned in Eq. (42) sample from
regions containing many nearby points with high proba-
bility. This is in contrast with previous examples where
clusters were equally likely to appear in any regions of
the state space. In Fig. 8, samples generated from the
three point processes for an inhomogeneous state space
formed based on the locations of 37 Canadian cities are
presented. The state space is formed with the locations
of the three most highly-populated cities in each province
or territory. The TPP sample assigns a high probability
to clusters of cities that are nearby, therefore identify-
ing provinces whose largest cities are located near each
other. The PPP sample also contains small clusters due
to the random nature of the process. However, the points
generated by DPP are fairly scattered. The preference of
9
  
DPP(a) PPP(b) PerPP(c) 
FIG. 7: Samples generated with (a) determinantal, (b) Poisson, and (c) GBS-inspired permanental point processes in a two-
dimensional space containing 2500 points. DPP samples have points that are scattered and spread out in space. PPPs treat
all patterns uniformly, so both clustering and repulsion are typically present. For the GBS-inspired PerPP, sample points are
likely to occur in clusters of nearby points.
TPP for sampling from dense regions can be used to mark
the points of a state space by assigning them with val-
ues that specify the number of times they appear among
several TPP outputs. The magnitude of these marks is
a measure of the closeness of a point to its neighbours.
An example of such marked points is shown in Fig. 8(d),
where the number of times that each city appears in a
TPP output was aggregated for 100 runs. The resulting
marks are typically larger for cities located in dense re-
gions as they tend to appear more frequently in the TPP
samples.
  
5 10 15 20 25 30
petalLength
(a) DPP (b) PPP
(c) TPP (d) marked  
      TPP
FIG. 8: Samples generated with (a) determinantal, (b) Pois-
son, and (c) Torontonian point processes in a two-dimensional
space containing 37 Canadian cities. The parameter σ in the
kernel matrix in Eq. (42) was set to 1. The sizes of the circles
in panel (d) indicate the number of times each city appeared
in 100 TPP samples. In this setting, TPPs can help identify
cities that have other large cities nearby.
The appearance of clustered points in the TPP
outputs of inhomogeneous state spaces is a feature that
can be used in diﬀerent applications. For instance,
TPPs could be implemented to increase the eﬃciency of
classical clustering algorithms. Several problems in data
mining and machine learning require the classiﬁcation
of unlabeled data into separate groups or categories.
A clustering algorithm that is commonly used in this
context is the k-means++ method, which partitions a
number of data points into k clusters such that each
data point belongs to the cluster with the closest mean
[81].
In the k-means++ algorithm, the initial assignment
of the cluster means is arbitrary and the centers selected
initially can be far from the actual cluster means. We
have already observed that the application of TPPs to
such state spaces generates point patterns that are clus-
tered at the high density regions. These points are likely
to be close to the actual cluster means and therefore can
be used as candidates for selecting better initial means
in the k-means++ algorithm. We apply this procedure
on a dataset containing 120 points partitioned into three
clusters. The clusters were generated by choosing three
cluster centers randomly and then generating 40 points
from Gaussian distributions centered at each of these
initial centers. The dataset and the cluster centers are
shown in Fig. 9(a).
Application of TPP to this dataset provides points that
are close to the actual cluster means. Examples of such
TPP point patterns are shown in Fig. 9(b). The applica-
tion of TPP transforms the original dataset into a smaller
set of points that are well-separated and, more impor-
tantly, fairly concentrated around the cluster centers. As
a result, the k-means++ algorithm applied to the points
generated by TPP provides, with a higher probability, a
set of initial centroids that are very close to the actual
cluster means. An example of such initial centroids, se-
10
FIG. 9: (a) A dataset containing 120 points partitioned into 3 clusters with the initial seeds generated by the k-means++
method. The actual cluster centroids are also shown. (b) Application of TPP to the same dataset provides points that are
close to the actual cluster centers. The initial seeds generated by the k-means++ method applied to the TPP points are also
shown.
lected by the the k-means++ algorithm from the TPP
points, is shown in Fig. 9(b). The combination of the
TPP and k-means++ methods increases the probability
of initiating the clustering procedure from a better set
of initial seeds, which can potentially make the whole
clustering processes more eﬃcient.
C. Cluster location
Kernel matrices have a central eﬀect on the properties
of matrix point processes. In the examples considered so
far, the elements of the kernel matrices were functions
of the Euclidean distance between the points of a spatial
state space. However, the components of the kernel
matrix can be designed to represent additional features.
For instance, in a homogeneous state space where the
points are evenly distributed, TPP outputs contain
local clusters in regions of the state space without any
preference for where these clusters are located. To
introduce control over the location of clusters, the kernel
matrix can be rescaled to favor the appearance of points
in hotspot regions.
One concrete method of adding control over the lo-
cation of point clusters is to assign a density to each
point in state space, resulting in a density vector λ =
(λ1,λ 2,...,λ m), with λi ≥ 0. In this case, the kernel
matrix of Eq. (42) can be adapted to
Ki,j =λiλje−‖ri−rj‖2/σ2
. (43)
We apply a TPP with this kernel matrix to generate sam-
ples in a homogeneous state space deﬁned with discrete
points distributed evenly in a uniform grid, where each
point represents the intersection of two major streets in
the downtown area of the city of Toronto. The back-
ground population density at each intersection was ap-
proximately estimated from our own experience, and in-
cluded in the kernel matrix of equation (43). The vari-
ation in the distances between the neighboring intersec-
tions was neglected for simplicity. An example of this
statistical model is shown in Fig. 10, where we illustrate
a typical sample of points. The TPP samples generated
with the resulting kernel matrix produce points that are
clustered in more congested areas of the city. More so-
phisticated models could be built from such GBS point
processes by ﬁne-tuning the kernel matrix and introduc-
ing more elaborate rules to generate samples that can
be used to model diﬀerent types of events occurring in a
region.
Bathurst
Spadina
University
Bay
Yonge
Church
Jarvis
Sherbourne
Parliament
Lakeshore
Front
King
Queen
Dundas
College
Wellesley
Bloor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
FIG. 10: A TPP point pattern sampled with a kernel matrix
that has been rescaled according to the estimated popula-
tion density of each major intersection in downtown Toronto,
which was assigned a density on a scale of 1 to 10. The den-
sity is illustrated by the shade of the squares centered at the
intersections, with darker colors corresponding to higher den-
sity.
11
FIG. 11: Typical samples of correlation matrices of stocks selected from the S&P 500 index collection by applying (a) deter-
minantal, (b) Poisson, and (c) Torontonian point processes. The kernel matrix used to implement the point processes is the
correlation matrix constructed from the market data of the stocks of the S&P 500 index. The point process samples are subsets
of stocks, here shown by their stock symbols. For each subset, we display the corresponding correlation matrix. Lighter points
correspond to large entries of the correlation matrix. The TPP sample contains stocks that are highly correlated while the
DPP and PPP samples contain stocks with lower levels of correlation.
D. Correlation between points
The state space of a matrix point processes can be
designed to represent objects that are not necessarily
actual points in a physical space. In fact, the state space
can correspond to any collection of items. Additionally,
kernel matrices may represent more general forms of
correlations between points, not just those due to spatial
proximity. This opens up new ﬁelds of application for
generating samples in abstract spaces. For instance,
a central problem in ﬁnancial optimization is to select
groups of stocks and bonds either for investment or to
be combined into new ﬁnancial products. To reduce in-
vestment risk, it is important to avoid buying correlated
assets whose prices ﬂuctuate in synchrony, in which case
it is helpful to identify them [82]. Additionally, ﬁnding
groups of correlated assets can reveal market trends that
may be otherwise diﬃcult to anticipate.
GBS point processes can be used to identify correlated
stocks by setting the correlation matrix of the stocks as
the kernel matrix of the point process. To construct the
correlation matrix, we take a vector of returns Rj =
(R1,j,R 2,j,...,R n,j)T , where Ri,j is the return of stock
i on the j-th day. The correlation matrix Σ is given by
Σ = 1
n
n∑
j=1
RjRT
j. (44)
The point patterns generated by TPPs applied with
such kernel matrices are expected to contain stocks with
higher levels of correlations, i.e., the clusters correspond
to collections of correlated stocks.
Here we apply TPP to stocks of the S&P 500 index,
constructing a correlation matrix from publicly-available
pricing data for the stocks comprising the S&P 500 stock
index during the ﬁve-year period 2013-2018 [83]. Not all
stocks remain in the index during this time period, so we
focus on the 474 stocks that do. We use this correlation
matrix directly as the point process kernel matrix. In
this setting, point patterns correspond to subsets of
stocks, which we illustrate in terms of their respective
covariance matrix.
Typical samples from DPP, PPP, and TPP are shown
in Fig. 11. A sample in this context is a subset of
stocks, illustrated by the corresponding correlation ma-
trix. Comparison of the TPP result with those con-
taining the same number of stocks selected by DPP and
PPP indicates the ability of TPP in detecting stocks with
higher levels of correlation. For example, the four stocks
that form a cluster on the top left corner of Fig. 11 (c)
correspond to Cabot Oil & Gas (COG), ConocoPhillips
(COP), Devon Energy (DVN), and Halliburton (HAL),
all of which are companies involved in petroleum explo-
ration and therefore expected to be highly correlated.
It is noted that clustering algorithms have been used in
portfolio optimization and can provide more stable in-
vestment strategies compared to conventional techniques
[82]. Similarly, TPP could be used in this context to de-
tect correlations that might be even hidden from classical
clustering techniques.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We have proposed an application of quantum comput-
ing to statistical modeling by introducing a class of point
processes that can be implemented with special-purpose
photonic quantum computers. These point processes are
generally intractable to implement with conventional
methods but, as we have shown, they can be eﬃciently
implemented with GBS devices. For models with
positive semideﬁnite kernel matrices, we have developed
fast quantum-inspired algorithms whose runtime is
12
quadratic in the size of the state space. This includes an
eﬃcient algorithm for permanental point process which
did not exist previously in the literature. Our results
open up the possibility of a wider application of point
processes that generate clustered data points, which
were previously less explored due to the challenges in
their implementation.
Point processes can be employed to provide insights
into stochastic phenomena of interest, represent patterns
with desired properties, or help with the identiﬁcation
of speciﬁc structures. Besides these general applica-
tions, the GBS point processes developed here can be
implemented in many other diﬀerent scenarios. Here we
explored some of the potential applications of the GBS
point processes to illustrate their versatility and useful-
ness. Further work is required to fully understand and
quantify the advantages of using GBS in these contexts,
but our results already give an insight of the scope of
this photonic quantum technology. For example, kernel
matrices play a key role in determining the properties of
the generated point patterns. We focused our attention
on kernel matrices that represent the similarity between
the points, a speciﬁc choice that was adopted because
clustering of the resulting point patterns was important
for the applications we considered. However, many
other options are possible: kernel matrices can reﬂect
diﬀerences between points, they can represent graphs
in the form of adjacency matrices as in Refs. [84–88],
or they can be trained from data to produce desired
patterns.
The fundamental connection between point processes
and GBS can also be harnessed from another perspec-
tive. The statistical features of the point processes that
have been analyzed analytically and numerically here
can be used as indicators for validating the correctness
of physical GBS machines. For instance, a GBS point
process implemented with the kernel matrices used here
will result in point patterns with enhanced aggregation
of points. Accordingly, any GBS device programmed
according to such matrices should output clustered
point patterns, a feature that if veriﬁed in an actual
implementation can be used as an initial signal of the
proper functioning of the device.
From a fundamental perspective, our work brings the
connection between statistical modeling and physical
systems full circle: not only can mathematical models
be used to simulate natural processes, physical systems
themselves can be engineered and programmed to im-
plement abstract models. Remarkably, this is ultimately
possible by controlling the behavior of fundamental
particles — photons — and mediating their interactions
via macroscopic matter.
Acknowledgements
We thank David Duvenaud, Luke Helt, Alain Delgado,
Zeyue Niu, Rafal Janik, Paul Finlay, Smriti Shyamal and
Christian Weedbrook for valuable discussions. We also
thank Andrey Goussev for providing the picture in Fig. 1.
Appendix
Point patterns generated with determinantal, Poisson,
and Torontonian point processes in a state apace contain-
ing 100 points, spread evenly in a two dimensional space,
are presented in Fig. A.1. These samples are provided
to visually illustrate the typical features of the point
patterns and complement the results presented in Sec-
tion IV. Inspection of the patterns demonstrate that the
points generated by DPP are scattered and spread out
in space, the PPP patterns contain both clustering and
repulsion, and clustering of the points is more probable
in TPP samples.
13
DPP
PPP
TPP
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIG. A.1: Samples generated with determinantal, Poisson, and Torontonian spatial point processes in a two-dimensional space
containing 100 points. DPP was set to generate 10 points for each sample. The patterns generated with PPP and TPP usually
contain diﬀerent number of points but only those samples that contained 10 points are shown here for consistency.
14
[1] P. W. Shor, in Proceedings 35th Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science (IEEE, 1994), pp. 124–
134.
[2] L. K. Grover, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 325 (1997).
[3] A. W. Harrow, A. Hassidim, and S. Lloyd, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 103, 150502 (2009).
[4] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, arXiv:1411.4028
(2014).
[5] D. A. Freedman, Statistical Models: Theory and Practice
(Cambridge University Press, 2009).
[6] D. R. Cox and V. Isham, Point processes, vol. 12 (CRC
Press, 1980).
[7] D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones, An introduction to the
theory of point processes: Volume I: Probability and its
Applications (2003).
[8] D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones, An introduction to the
theory of point processes: Volume II: General Theory and
Structure (Springer Science & Business Media, 2007).
[9] A. Baddeley, I. B´ ar´ any, and R. Schneider, Stochastic Ge-
ometry: Lectures Given at the CIME Summer School
Held in Martina Franca, Italy, September 13–18, 2004
pp. 1–75 (2007).
[10] A. Baddeley, P. Gregori, J. Mateu, R. Stoica, and
D. Stoyan, Case studies in spatial point process model-
ing, vol. 185 (Springer, 2006).
[11] T. Bj¨ ork, Y. Kabanov, and W. Runggaldier, Math. Fi-
nanc. 7, 211 (1997).
[12] L. Bauwens and N. Hautsch, in Handbook of ﬁnancial
time series (Springer, 2009), pp. 953–979.
[13] P. Embrechts, T. Liniger, and L. Lin, J. Appl. Probab.
48, 367 (2011).
[14] E. Bacry, I. Mastromatteo, and J.-F. Muzy,
arXiv:1502.04592 (2015).
[15] Y. Ogata, J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 83, 9 (1988).
[16] Y. Ogata, Ann. Inst. Stat. Math. 50, 379 (1998).
[17] Y. Kagan and L. Knopoﬀ, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter. 14,
97 (1977).
[18] Y. Li, T. D. Majarian, A. W. Naik, G. R. Johnson, and
R. F. Murphy, Cytom. A 89, 633 (2016).
[19] V. Fromion, E. Leoncini, and P. Robert, SIAM J. Appl.
Math. 73, 195 (2013).
[20] J. Dodgson, A. Chessel, M. Yamamoto, F. Vaggi, S. Cox,
E. Rosten, D. Albrecht, M. Geymonat, A. Csikasz-Nagy,
M. Sato, et al., Nat. Commun. 4, 1834 (2013).
[21] H. Jing, Y. Yang, and R. M. Nishikawa, Phys. Med. Biol.
56, 1 (2010).
[22] K. Grell, P. J. Diggle, K. Frederiksen, J. Schz, E. Cardis,
and P. K. Andersen, Stat. Med. 34, 3170 (2015).
[23] C. C. T. Fok, J. O. Ramsay, M. Abrahamowicz, and
P. Fortin, Can. J. Stat. 40, 517 (2012).
[24] J. B. Illian and D. F. R. P. Burslem, Adv. Stat. Anal.
101, 495 (2017).
[25] J. Igea and A. J. Tanentzap, Sci. Adv. 5 (2019).
[26] D. I. Warton and L. C. Shepherd, Ann. Appl. Stat. 4,
1383 (2010).
[27] X. Mi, L. Bao, C. Jianhua, and K. Ma, J. Plant Ecol. 7,
126 (2014).
[28] J. B. Illian, S. Martino, S. H. Srbye, J. B. Gallego-
Fernndez, M. Zunzunegui, M. P. Esquivias, and J. M. J.
Travis, Methods Ecol. Evol. 4, 305 (2013).
[29] B. Picinbono and C. Bendjaballah, Phys. Rev. A 82,
063811 (2010).
[30] M. A. Klatt and S. Torquato, Phys. Rev. E 90, 052120
(2014).
[31] A. Wohrer, Phys. Rev. E 99, 042147 (2019).
[32] L. Schmidt, I. Fouxon, and M. Holzner, Phys. Rev. Fluids
2, 074302 (2017).
[33] B. Halle and F. Persson, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 9,
2838 (2013).
[34] F. Persson and B. Halle, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 8735
(2013).
[35] C. Tzoumanekas and D. N. Theodorou, Macromolecules
39, 4592 (2006).
[36] R. A. Lazenby, F. C. Macazo, R. F. Wormsbecher, and
R. J. White, Anal. Chem. 90, 903 (2018).
[37] A. Talattof and G. L. Amidon, Mol. Pharmaceutics 15,
2107 (2018).
[38] O. Macchi, Adv. Appl. Probab. 7, 83 (1975).
[39] A. Borodin, arXiv:0911.1153 (2009).
[40] F. Lavancier, J. Møller, and E. Rubak, J. R. Stat. Soc.
B 77, 853 (2015).
[41] A. Borodin and G. Olshanski, Commun. Math. Phys.
211, 335 (2000).
[42] T. Shirai and Y. Takahashi, in Proceedings of the second
ISAAC Congress (Springer, 2000), pp. 15–23.
[43] A. Okounkov, Sel. Math. New Ser. 7, 57 (2001).
[44] A. Okounkov and N. Reshetikhin, J. Am. Math. Soc. 16,
581 (2003).
[45] A. Borodin and A. Soshnikov, J. Stat. Phys. 113, 595
(2003).
[46] K. Johansson, Commun. Math. Phys. 252, 111 (2004).
[47] K. Johansson, arXiv math-ph/0510038 (2005).
[48] A. Borodin and E. M. Rains, J. Stat. Phys. 121, 291
(2005).
[49] A. Borodin, P. Diaconis, and J. Fulman, Bull. Am. Math.
Soc. 47, 639 (2010).
[50] J. B. Hough, M. Krishnapur, Y. Peres, B. Vir´ ag, et al.,
Probab. Surv. 3, 206 (2006).
[51] A. Kulesza and B. Taskar, in Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (2010), pp. 1171–1179.
[52] A. Kulesza and B. Taskar, in Proceedings of the 28th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-11)
(2011), pp. 1193–1200.
[53] H. Lin and J. A. Bilmes, arXiv:1210.4871 (2012).
[54] A. Kulesza, B. Taskar, et al., Foundations and Trends in
Machine Learning 5, 123 (2012).
[55] J. A. Gillenwater, A. Kulesza, E. Fox, and B. Taskar,
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(2014), pp. 3149–3157.
[56] J. Hartline, V. Mirrokni, and M. Sundararajan, in Pro-
ceedings of the 17th international conference on World
Wide Web (ACM, 2008), pp. 189–198.
[57] S. Dughmi, T. Roughgarden, and M. Sundararajan, in
Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on Electronic
commerce (ACM, 2009), pp. 243–252.
[58] H.-W. Lee, E. Modiano, and K. Lee, IEEE/ACM Trans-
actions on Networking (TON) 18, 1895 (2010).
[59] G. Kim, E. P. Xing, L. Fei-Fei, and T. Kanade, in 2011
International Conference on Computer Vision (IEEE,
2011), pp. 169–176.
[60] R. H. Aﬀandi, A. Kulesza, E. Fox, and B. Taskar, in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (2013), pp. 85–98.
15
[61] P. McCullagh and J. Møller, Adv. Appl. Probab. 38, 873
(2006).
[62] H. Kogan, M. B. Marcus, and J. Rosen, arXiv:1008.3522
(2010).
[63] F. D. Cunden, S. N. Majumdar, and N. O’Connell, J.
Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52, 165202 (2019).
[64] C. Weedbrook, S. Pirandola, R. Garc´ ıa-Patr´ on, N. J.
Cerf, T. C. Ralph, J. H. Shapiro, and S. Lloyd, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 84, 621 (2012).
[65] A. Seraﬁni, Quantum Continuous Variables: A Primer
of Theoretical Methods (CRC Press, 2017).
[66] B. Picinbono, IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 44, 2637
(1996).
[67] R. Simon, N. Mukunda, and B. Dutta, Phys. Rev. A 49,
1567 (1994).
[68] C. S. Hamilton, R. Kruse, L. Sansoni, S. Barkhofen,
C. Silberhorn, and I. Jex, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 170501
(2017).
[69] E. R. Caianiello, Il Nuovo Cimento (1943-1954) 10, 1634
(1953).
[70] A. Barvinok, Combinatorics and complexity of partition
functions, vol. 276 (Springer, 2016).
[71] A. Bj¨ orklund, B. Gupt, and N. Quesada,
arXiv:1805.12498 (2018).
[72] S. Aaronson and A. Arkhipov, in Proceedings of the forty-
third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing
(ACM, 2011), pp. 333–342.
[73] N. Quesada, J. M. Arrazola, and N. Killoran, Phys. Rev.
A 98, 062322 (2018).
[74] J. Williamson, Am. J. Math. 58, 141 (1936).
[75] C. Bloch and A. Messiah, Nucl. Phys. 39, 95 (1962).
[76] S. Rahimi-Keshari, A. P. Lund, and T. C. Ralph, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114, 060501 (2015).
[77] G. Cariolaro and G. Pierobon, Phys. Rev. A 94, 062109
(2016).
[78] C. Caves, Polar decomposition, singular-value
decomposition, and Autonne-Takagi factoriza-
tion, Quantum Information Lecture Notes (2017),
URL http://info.phys.unm.edu/~caves/courses/
qinfo-s17/lectures/polarsingularAutonne.pdf.
[79] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix analysis (Cam-
bridge university press, 1990).
[80] Y. Li, F. Baccelli, H. S. Dhillon, and J. G. Andrews,
IEEE Trans. Commun. 63, 3405 (2015).
[81] D. Arthur and S. Vassilvitskii, K-means++: the advan-
tages of careful seeding (In Proceedings of the 18th An-
nual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
2007).
[82] D. Len, A. Aragn, J. Sandoval, G. Hernndez, A. Arvalo,
and J. Nio, Procedia Comput. Sci. 108, 1334 (2017).
[83] C. Nugent (2018), URL https://www.kaggle.com/
camnugent/sandp500.
[84] K. Br´ adler, P.-L. Dallaire-Demers, P. Rebentrost, D. Su,
and C. Weedbrook, Phys. Rev. A 98, 032310 (2018).
[85] J. M. Arrazola and T. R. Bromley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121,
030503 (2018).
[86] J. M. Arrazola, T. R. Bromley, and P. Rebentrost, Phys.
Rev. A 98, 012322 (2018).
[87] K. Bradler, S. Friedland, J. Izaac, N. Killoran, and D. Su,
arXiv:1810.10644 (2018).
[88] M. Schuld, K. Bradler, R. Israel, D. Su, and B. Gupt,
arXiv:1905.12646 (2019).