UNIVERSAL DIMENSION-FREE BROADCASTING COMPARISON
Cycle03 proof packet. 2026-10-09.

Theorem: every finite-dimensional bistochastic, Hilbert-Schmidt-self-adjoint self-compatible quantum channel Phi has ONE canonical pure-state entanglement-breaking channel Psi with
  Psi >= (2Phi²-I)+,
  I-Psi <=2(I-Phi²)<=4(I-Phi),
in full Hermitian Hilbert-Schmidt quadratic-form order.
Arbitrary bistochastic self-compatible channels admit the analogous factor8 bound against I-symPhi. No dimension, spectral gap or per-query measurement is required.

Proof status: complete written proof, an independent theorem-first reconstruction, exposed adversarial audit, and root audit have found no gap. These are internal model-assisted checks, not external mathematical certification or a formal proof. Historical novelty and the programme's 10/10 objective remain unestablished. The main filename retains CANDIDATE to preserve its audited frozen bytes.

Read UNIVERSAL_C4_CANDIDATE.txt, then INDEPENDENT_RECONSTRUCTION.txt and EXPOSED_AUDIT.txt. The reconstruction's rectangular-channel adjoint convention is clarified in INDEPENDENT_NOTATION_CLARIFICATION.txt.

Run exact finite diagnostics with Python3 and SymPy (tested1.14.0), assertions enabled:
  python3 verify_tree_moments.py
  python3 exact_tree_audit.py
  python3 verify_generic.py
  python3 replay_entropy_exact.py
They check the actual one-measurement moments and full-coordinate Schur bound for an explicit noncommuting spin-one broadcaster, and a negative unit mode. They do not prove the general limit theorem; its proof is analytic.

The theorem assumes the broadcaster exists. Its tree construction has exponential receivers and far more raw outcomes, and exact existence uses compactness. Finite abstract support is not an efficient acquisition or implementation algorithm. The separately supplied faithful-tracial extension includes center-mixing channels, and the entropy consequence handles unbounded likelihood through clipping. Their proof texts and independent generic/entropy replays are included. The general capacity endpoint is assembled in the separate bounded-capacity-classicality packet.

Classical Kesten-Stigum estimators and quantum broadcasting measurements are prior mechanisms, explicitly compared in PRIMARY_SOURCE_COMPARISON.txt. Absence of an identical theorem in this bounded search is not evidence of priority. The cached primary PDFs are in the full research archive, not this compact packet.
