arXiv:2209.05330v2  [quant-ph]  14 Feb 2023
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian Sta tes by
Automatic Diﬀerentiation of Generating Functions
Erik Fitzke, 1 Florian Niederschuh, 1 and Thomas Walther 1
Institute for Applied Physics, Technische Universit¨ at Da rmstadt,
Schlossgartenstraße 7, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany
(*Electronic mail: thomas.walther@physik.tu-darmstadt.de)
(Dated: 15 February 2023)
Advances in photonics require photon-number resolved simulations of quantum optical experiments with
Gaussian states. We demonstrate a simple and versatile method to s imulate the photon statistics of general
multimode Gaussian states. The derived generating functions enab le simulations of the photon number
distribution, cumulative probabilities, moments, and factorial mome nts of the photon statistics of Gaussian
states as well as of multimode photon-added and photon-subtrac ted Gaussian states. Numerical results
are obtained by automatic diﬀerentiation of these generating func tions by employing the software framework
PyTorch. Our approach is particularly well suited for practical simu lations of the photon statistics of quantum
optical experiments in realistic scenarios with low photon numbers, in which various sources of imperfections
have to be taken into account. As an example, we calculate the dete ction probabilities for a recent multipartite
time-bin coding quantum key distribution setup and compare them wit h the corresponding experimental
values.
Keywords: Gaussian boson sampling, Gaussian states, probability g enerating function, photon statistics,
quantum key distribution, quantum simulation, automatic diﬀerentia tion
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent progress in the generation, manipulation, and
detection of photonic quantum states has led to new ap-
plications in the ﬁeld of photonic quantum information
processing and sensing. An example is photonic quan-
tum computing, which can be realized by using only
single-photon sources, beam splitters, phase shifters, and
photon detectors 1. Other applications such as quan-
tum key distribution (QKD) or quantum imaging have
gained considerable attention over the last years and be-
come commercially relevant, requiring the development
of sophisticated optical setups working at the single-
photon level 2,3. Photon-number resolved (PNR) detec-
tion of quantum states opens new pathways to experi-
ments and applications requiring the simulation of such
experiments.
The strength of nonlinear optical interactions between
light and matter typically decreases rapidly with the
order of the nonlinear eﬀect. Therefore, many com-
mon photonic quantum states are described by Hamil-
tonians that are at most quadratic in the creation and
annihilation operators. States with such Hamiltonians
are called Gaussian states (GSs) and include e.g. vac-
uum, coherent states, squeezed states, thermal states,
or states generated by spontaneous parametric down-
conversion (SPDC). Transformations by optical setups
described by such Hamiltonians, introduced e.g. by phase
shifters or beam splitters, map GSs to other GSs. Hence,
the capability to simulate the photon statistics of GSs
is of great practical relevance. The covariance formalism
describes GSs by a covariance matrix and a displacement
vector and allows the modeling of many common eﬀects
on GSs in experiments, such as losses, phase shifts, and
interference at beam splitters, by relatively simple ma-
trix transformations of the covariance matrix and dis-
placement vector 4–7. Therefore, it lends itself to the im-
plementation of simulations of quantum optical experi-
ments. Importantly, the covariance formalism, described
brieﬂy in appendix A 1, carries the full information about
the photon statistics of the state.
While non-PNR detectors such as single-photon
avalanche photodiodes are common, a variety of detec-
tor types capable of PNR detection have been developed
as well 8. Transition edge sensors combine high detec-
tion eﬃciencies and PNR capabilities, but can only be
operated at comparatively low count rates 9. Supercon-
ducting nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs) can
be operated at higher count rates and allow to realize
PNR detection by evaluating the electronic output pulse
shape depending on the number of incident photons 10
or by subdividing the light-sensitive area into multiple
pixels11–14. SNSPD detectors achieving photon-number
resolution with eight pixels are commercially available 15.
Not only SNSPDs but also single-photon avalanche de-
tectors have been multiplexed, in time 16,17 or space 18,
to realize PNR detectors. In such multiplexing setups,
multiple photons can hit the same sub-detector so that
the photons are not resolved. But, with an increasing
number of detectors, the counting statistics converge to
the actual PND 18,19.
The task to ﬁnd the detection probability
p(n) = p(n1,...,n S) for n1 photons in mode 1,
n2 photons in mode 2 etc. of a GS with S modes, i.e.
its photon number distribution (PND), is known as the
Gaussian boson sampling (GBS) problem 20. Experi-
mentally, GBS has been realized e.g. using networks
of beam splitters on photonic chips 21,22. Large-scale
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 2
GBS experiments have been realized for example in
the context of quantum computing and to pursue the
demonstration of the computational advantage of quan-
tum computers over classical computers 23–25. Ref. 26
discusses possible applications for GBS-based quantum
computing. The computational complexity of simulating
GBS has been investigated as a benchmark for optical
quantum computing comparing it to GBS simulations
on classical computers 20,27–34. The fact that GBS is
investigated in the context of computational quantum
supremacy indicates that calculating the solution to
GBS problems can require substantial computational
resources. The PND can be calculated by evaluating
expressions involving matrix functions called the Haf-
nian and loop Hafnian for PNR detection as well as of
functions called the Torontonian and loop Torontonian
for non-PNR detection 20,30,33,35,36. The operation count
for the evaluation of these functions scales exponentially
with the number of detected photons and optimization
of the algorithms is an active ﬁeld of research 34.
The previously mentioned methods for GBS computa-
tions have been designed for calculating PNDs with many
photons eﬃciently, but do not oﬀer much ﬂexibility. Typ-
ically, quantum optical setups not designed for the par-
ticular task of GBS quantum computation are operated
at low photon numbers. Examples are applications in
quantum ghost imaging and QKD, where coincidences
involving only a relatively small number of detectors are
relevant. If such a setup is to be simulated, minimizing
the required computational resources is not necessarily
the main concern. However, often a simulation method
is required that is ﬂexible enough to include imperfec-
tions inevitably present in real setups. In this paper, we
present such a simulation method. The purpose of our
method is not to compete with specialized GBS algo-
rithms in terms of performance, but rather to provide a
ﬂexible and simple way to compute the photon statistics
for imperfect setups.
Two relevant eﬀects in experimental setups are the si-
multaneous detection of multiple modes by the same de-
tector and noise in the detection process. These eﬀects
require the convolution of probability distributions which
can conveniently be expressed by the multiplication of the
corresponding probability-generating functions. There-
fore, we derive generating functions of the photon statis-
tics in terms of the covariance matrix and displacement
vector in section II. Our generating-function approach is
an alternative to the established expressions for the PND
involving Hafnian-type functions. This diﬀerent perspec-
tive on the GBS problem allows for deriving several re-
lated expressions for the generating functions of cumu-
lative probabilities, raw or central moments, and rising
or falling factorial moments of the detection statistics
in section II B, for which so far no systematic method
existed. Furthermore, our method allows us to calculate
the same quantities for certain non-Gaussian states called
photon-added and photon-subtracted GSs as shown in
section II C considerably extending the range of possible
applications.
Generating functions need to be diﬀerentiated repeat-
edly to retrieve probabilities or moments. We show that
these derivatives can be evaluated numerically by auto-
matic diﬀerentiation (AD) without much eﬀort. An ad-
vantage of AD is that it provides accurate numerical re-
sults while hiding the whole complexity of the calculation
from the user. We discuss the usage of AD for our ap-
plication in section II D and provide an implementation
example in Ref. 37.
Our simulation method consists of two steps, con-
nected by the generating function. First, the quantum
state and the optical setup are modeled in the covariance
formalism. Second, the photon statistics are obtained by
AD of the generating function expressed in terms of the
covariance matrix and displacement vector. Both steps
can be easily implemented with widely available software,
making the method very practical. However, it is ex-
pected that optimized algorithms for the evaluation of
Hafnian-type functions will outperform general-purpose
AD algorithms for the particular task of calculating the
PND. To show that our method can nevertheless be used
to simulate various aspects of Gaussian photon statis-
tics eﬃciently for small photon numbers, we apply it to
multiple examples with common GSs in section III.
As a more complex application, we present in sec-
tion IV a simulation of an entanglement-based QKD sys-
tem we presented recently in Ref. 38. It demonstrates the
strengths of our method to readily incorporate relevant
imperfections such as noise, detection eﬃciencies, and si-
multaneous detection of multiple modes. Although the
experimental setup is complex, the simulation is straight-
forward because it can be broken down into elementary
operations described by basic Gaussian state transforma-
tions. The simulation results are in very good agreement
with the experimental values. Furthermore, we show
that the contribution of multi-photon pair emission to
the quantum bit error rate of the QKD system can be es-
timated by applying Bayes’ theorem to PNR simulation
results.
II. GENERATING FUNCTIONS FOR THE DETECTION
STATISTICS OF GAUSSIAN STATES
Our method to simulate the photon statistics of GSs
uses generating functions for the photon statistics in
terms of the covariance matrix Γ and the displacement
vector d. They connect the covariance formalism to the
photon statistics and are therefore essential for our simu-
lation method. In appendix A 2 we brieﬂy summarize the
relevant properties of generating functions for probabil-
ity distributions. In the following section II A, we brieﬂy
recap the formulation of the PND in terms of a gener-
ating operator and extend it to generating operators for
the moments and factorial moments.
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 3
A. Generating operators for photon detection probabilitie s
and moments
Assuming a photon detection process where photons in
a single mode are detected independently of each other
with an eﬃciency η, the probability to detect n photons
from a quantum state ̺ is given by 39–42
p(n) =
⟨
: (η ˆN )n
n! e−η ˆN :
⟩
. (1)
Here, normal order is indicated by : : and the photon
number operator is ˆN = ˆa†ˆa. By inserting eq. ( 1) into
the deﬁning equation of a probability generating func-
tion h(y) (cf. eq. ( A14)), the PND can be obtained from
the expectation value of a generating operator ˆh(y)39–42.
This method has recently been used by Nauth to ex-
press the PND of biphoton states in terms of the co-
variance matrix 43. We extend this procedure to obtain
similar generating operators for the moment generating
functionM (µ,y ) and rising factorial moment generating
function R(y) as described in appendix A 2:
ˆh(y) = :eη(y−1) ˆN : , (2)
ˆM (µ,y ) = e −yµ :exp
(
η(ey − 1) ˆN
):, (3)
ˆR(y) = 1
1 −y :eηy ˆN /(1−y): . (4)
These operators can be modiﬁed to take into account
noise in the detection process. For that, according to
the multiplication rule for generating functions (cf. ap-
pendix A 2), the generating operator is simply multi-
plied by the generating function of the noise process.
As an example, we consider noise with Poissonian statis-
tics pnoise(n) = e −ννn/n! and noise parameter ν. The
probability generating function of the noise is given by
hnoise(y) = e ν(y−1) so that the generating operators
from eqs. ( 2) to ( 4) including noise read e ν(y−1)ˆh(y),
exp
(
ν(ey − 1)
) ˆM (µ,y ) and e νy/ (1−y) ˆR(y).
Similarly, noise with diﬀerent statistics could be taken
into account by multiplying the generating operators
from eqs. ( 2) to ( 4) with the generating function of the
respective noise process. Another option is to include
noise in the covariance formalism. Thermal noise can be
modeled by coupling in a thermal state with a beam split-
ter or a matrix can be added to the covariance matrix to
represent e.g. classical Gaussian noise or noise from am-
pliﬁcation44.
Equations ( 2) to ( 4) have in common that they
involve special cases of the generating operator
ˆg(w(y)) = :exp(−w(y)ˆa†ˆa): for diﬀerent functions w(y).
In Ref. 45 and 46 the operator ˆg has been extended to
ˆg(u,v,w ) = :exp(uˆa +vˆa† −wˆa†ˆa): (5)
and has been related to the density matrix elements of ˆ ̺
by introducing u and v.
B. Generating functions in terms of the covariance matrix
and displacement vector
In experiments, often multiple modes, e.g. diﬀerent po-
larization directions or frequency modes, enter the same
detector. For example, calculating the simultaneous de-
tection of multiple modes is required for modeling imper-
fect interference due to a mode mismatch with the model
from Ref. 47, which we use in section IV. Furthermore,
often joint detection probabilities between multiple de-
tectors such as coincidence probabilities are of interest.
Therefore, we generalize the calculation to multi-mode
states.
In appendix B 2 we show that for multiple modes with
vectors u, v, and w, G(u, v, w) = ⟨ˆg(u, v, w)⟩ can be
expressed in terms of the covariance matrix Γ and dis-
placement vector d by
G(u, v, w) = exp(−zTΛ−1W z/2 +Z)√
det Λ
(6)
with the diagonal matrix W = diag( w) ⊕ diag(w),
Λ = 11 + W (Γ − 11)/2, Z =∑
susvsw−1
s and z = d + ζ
with ζ as deﬁned in eq. ( B9). Equation ( 6) is the gener-
ating function for the multivariate photon statistics from
which the probabilities and moments are retrieved by re-
peated diﬀerentiation w.r.t. D parameters y1...y D for
the detectors d = 1...D , detecting Md modes, with ad-
ditional Poissonian noise 1νd. The total number of modes
isS =∑
dMd and the index s runs over all mode indices,
i.e. enumerates md = 1 d...M d for all D detectors in the
order 1 1, 21,...,M 1, 12,...M 2,......M D. Abbreviating
G(w) = G(0, 0, w) and employing a multi-index nota-
tion2 we obtain:
1 Similarly, the generating function of noise processes with a dif-
ferent, non-Poissonian statistics could be taken into acco unt by
multiplying with the corresponding generating function.
2 For tuples x and k we write xk = ∏
i xki
i , so that
e.g. w− 1 = ∏
s w− 1
s . W e also use n! = ∏
d nd! and
∂ n
y = ∏
d
(
∂nd /∂y nd
d
)
.
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 4
p(n, ν, η) = ⟨ ˆΠN =n⟩ = 1
n! ∂n
y exp
(∑
d
(yd − 1)νd
)
G(w)
⏐⏐⏐y=0 with ws =ηmd (1 −yd), (7)
p(N ≤ n, ν, η) = ⟨ ˆΠN ≤n⟩ = 1
n! ∂n
y (1 − y)− 1 exp
(∑
d
(yd − 1)νd
)
G(w)
⏐⏐⏐y=0 with ws =ηmd (1 −yd), (8)
M(µ, k, ν, η) = ⟨( ˆN − µ)k⟩ = ∂k
y exp
(∑
d
(eyd − 1)νd −µdyd
)
G(w)
⏐⏐⏐y=0 with ws =ηmd (1 − eyd ), (9)
n(k)(ν, η) =
⟨∏
d
ˆNd(kd)
⟩
= ∂k
y exp
(∑
d
ydνd
)
G(w)
⏐⏐⏐y=0 with ws = −ηmdyd, (10)
n(k)(ν, η) =
⟨∏
d
ˆN (kd)
d
⟩
= ∂k
y (1 − y)− 1 exp
(∑
d
νdyd
1 −yd
)
G(w)
⏐⏐⏐⏐y=0
with ws = ηmdyd
yd − 1. (11)
Equations (6) to (11) connect the covariance formalism
and the photon statistics by repeated derivatives and are
therefore crucial for our simulation method. Alternative
expressions to calculate p(n), restricted to the noiseless
case, can be found in the literature and are discussed and
compared to eq. ( 7) in section V. Our generating-function
approach additionally yields eqs. ( 8) to ( 11) for the cu-
mulative probabilities, raw moments (for µ = 0), central
moments (for µ = ⟨ ˆN ⟩), and rising and falling factorial
moments directly incorporating the detection eﬃciency
and noise. For general multi-mode GSs, to the best of
our knowledge, expressions for these quantities have so
far not been presented in the literature.
The cumulative probabilities are useful when ranges
of photon numbers are to be analyzed jointly, espe-
cially when detection events in multiple detectors are
considered. For example, the calculation of the coinci-
dence probability to detect ≤n1 photons in one detector
and ≤n2 in a second detector from the PND requires the
evaluation of the probabilities for ( n1 + 1)(n2 + 1) com-
binations of photon numbers, but only one evaluation
of eq. ( 8). Mean and variance are two of the most im-
portant moments of the PND and can be directly calcu-
lated from eq. ( 9). The factorial moments are useful for
the calculation of photon statistics of photon-added and
photon-subtracted states (cf. section II C).
By using a formulation with detection opera-
tors ˆΠ, more complex detection events involving
multiple detectors can be calculated. For exam-
ple, the probability for the detection of nA pho-
tons in detector A and nB photons in detector B
is given by ⟨ ˆΠNA=nB ,NB=nB ⟩ = ⟨ ˆΠNA=nA
ˆΠNB =nB ⟩
and the probability for n1 or n2 photons in
the same detector with n1 ⁄= n2 is given by
⟨ ˆΠN =n1 or N =n2 ⟩ = ⟨ ˆΠN =n1 + ˆΠN =n2⟩. Operators for
complementary events can be deﬁned as well, enabling
the calculation of the probability to detect any photon
number except for n or for more than n photons with
ˆΠN ⁄=n = ˆ11 − ˆΠN =n and ˆΠN >n = ˆ11 − ˆΠN ≤n. The detec-
tion operators for diﬀerent modes are then joined before
the generating function is evaluated. This procedure was
used for example in Ref. 47 to relate the detection proba-
bilities for non-PNR detectors to the detection of vacuum
by considering operators ˆΠN >0 = ˆ11 − ˆΠN =0. We extend
this method to PNR detection. As an example, consider
the probability to not detect nA photons in detector A
and to detect more than nB photons in detector B:
⟨ ˆΠNA⁄=nA
ˆΠNB >nB
⟩
=
⟨
(ˆ11 − ˆΠNA=nA)(ˆ11 − ˆΠNB ≤nB )
⟩
= 1 − ⟨ ˆΠNA=nA ⟩ − ⟨ˆΠNB ≤nB ⟩ + ⟨ ˆΠNA=nA,NB≤nB ⟩ (12)
The last term, for example, is given by
∂ nB +nA
∂yAnA∂yB nB
exp(−dT
ABΛ−1
ABWABdAB/2)
nA!nB!(1 −yB)√det ΛAB
⏐⏐⏐⏐yA=0
yB =0
, (13)
where the modes for A and B are kept in Λ and d.
Finally, we derive multivariate expressions for ma-
trix elements of ˆ ̺. In appendix B 1 we present a
simple derivation of the matrix elements in terms of
g(u,v,w ) = ⟨ˆg(u,v,w )⟩. We generalize the single-mode
expressions from eqs. ( B3) and ( B5) to the multimode
case by using eq. ( 6):
⟨α|ˆ̺|β⟩ = e −(|α|2+|β|2)/2G(α∗, β, 1), (14)
⟨n|ˆ̺|m⟩ = (− 1)l
√
n!m!
∂l
w ∂∆n
u ∂∆m
v G(u, v, w)
⏐⏐⏐⏐ u=0
v=0
w=1
. (15)
In eq. ( 15) we deﬁne l by ls = min(ns,m s) as well as
∆n = n − l and ∆m = m − l. An equation similar
to eq. ( 15) with l = 0, ∆n = n and ∆m = m can
be derived diﬀerently 48 and can be related to an expres-
sion involving the loop Hafnian function. Compared to
this expression, our eq. ( 15) has the advantage that for
each mode the number of derivatives to be evaluated is
reduced from ns +ms to max(ns,m s). When the deriva-
tives are evaluated numerically, for example by automatic
diﬀerentiation (AD), our expression is especially advan-
tageous for close-by values of ns and ms.
C. Photon statistics of non-Gaussian states derived from
Gaussian states
The range of possible applications for our simulation
method of the photon statistics can be extended by
adapting it to apply to certain non-Gaussian states.
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 5
A special class of states derived from GSs ˆ̺ are photon-
added GSs ˆ̺+k and photon-subtracted GSs ˆ̺−k49,
ˆ̺+k = ˆa†k ˆ̺ˆak
m(k) and ˆ̺−k = ˆak ˆ̺ˆa†k
m(k)
, (16)
with k = k1,k 2,... photons added or subtracted from
the modes 1, 2,... . Here, the normally and anti-normally
ordered moments 45 m(k) = tr( ˆak ˆ̺ˆa†k) = ⟨ˆa†kˆak⟩ and
m(k) = tr( ˆa†k ˆ̺ˆak) = ⟨ˆakˆa†k⟩ ensure normalization.
They can be obtained from the falling and rising fac-
torial moments of the GS by setting η = 1 and ν = 0:
m(k) =
∑
n≥k
⟨n|ˆ̺|n⟩ n!
(n − k)! =n(k)(ν = 0, η = 1). (17)
Similarly, we directly obtain m(k) =n(k)(ν = 0, η = 1).
Here, our eqs. ( 10) and ( 11) for factorial moments are
helpful because they allow to calculate n(k) and n(k) di-
rectly.
Photon addition and photon subtraction can have non-
trivial eﬀects on the PND of quantum states. An exam-
ple is photon subtraction from a thermal state, which
increases the mean photon number of the state 49,50.
Photon-subtracted states can be approximately realized
by inserting a beam splitter with high transmission into
the beam and by conditioning the detection of the trans-
mitted quantum state on the detection of a reﬂected pho-
ton49–51. Photon addition has been realized by seeding
an SPDC process with low gain so that the SPDC signal
modes are emitted into the mode of the incident state.
The generation of the photon-added state is then con-
ditioned on the detection of an SPDC idler photon 52,53.
Photon addition and subtraction can be used for exam-
ple to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio in quantum ghost
imaging54.
The matrix elements of photon-added and photon-
subtracted GSs can be directly calculated by using
ˆak |l⟩ =
√
l!/(l −k)! |l −k⟩, given that l ≥ k, and
ˆa†k |l⟩ =
√
(k +l)!/l |k +l⟩:
⟨n|ˆ̺−k|l⟩ = ⟨n + k|ˆ̺|l + k⟩
m(k)
√
(l + k)!(n + k)!
l!n! , (18)
⟨n|ˆ̺+k|l⟩ = ⟨n − k|ˆ̺|l − k⟩
m(k)
√
l!n!
(l − k)!(n − k)!. (19)
The expressions for ⟨n + k|ˆ̺|l + k⟩ and ⟨n − k|ˆ̺|l − k⟩
can be calculated from the GS’s matrix elements by using
eq. ( 15).
To derive explicit expressions for the photon statistics,
we ﬁrst consider the single mode case of ˆ ̺−k. The op-
erator ˆa†k ˆgˆak is in normal order and we obtain from the
optical equivalence theorem in eq. ( B1)
tr(ˆ̺ˆa†k ˆgˆak) =
∫
C
P (α)|α|2k euα+vα∗−w|α|2
d2α. (20)
By comparison to the phase-space representation of ˆ g
from eq. ( B2), the expectation value of ˆ g with respect
to ˆ̺−k can be expressed in terms of the generating func-
tion of the underlying GS ˆ̺:
tr(ˆ̺−kˆg(u, v, w)) = (− 1)k
m(k)
∂k
wG(u, v, w). (21)
For the photon-added GS, we consider for simplicity
only G(w), as u and v are essentially only required for
the calculation of the matrix elements discussed above.
In appendix B 3, we derive the expression for the single-
mode case which generalizes to
tr(ˆ̺+kˆg(w)) = 1
m(k) ∂k
r G( ˜w)
∏
s
1
1 −rs(1 −ws)
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐r=0
(22)
with ˜ws = 1 − [(1 −ws)−1 −rs]−1.
This means that all the quantities of the photon statis-
tics for which we have derived expressions above can also
be calculated for multi-mode photon-added and photon-
subtracted GSs. In this context, G(w) = tr(ˆ ̺ˆg(w))
in eqs. ( 7) to ( 11) is replaced by the expressions for
tr(ˆ̺−kˆg(w)) and tr(ˆ̺+kˆg(w)) from eqs. ( 21) and ( 22).
To our knowledge, expressions for the PND of photon-
added and photon-subtracted GSs have so far only been
reported for single-mode states 55–59. Our expressions en-
able the calculation of the photon statistics for the gen-
eral multi-mode case and additionally enable the calcu-
lation of moments, factorial moments, and matrix ele-
ments. Moreover, the expressions are evaluated by re-
peated diﬀerentiation and can therefore be calculated
with the same tools as the expressions for GSs.
Certain non-Gaussian states ˆ̺′, such as NOON states
and cat states, can be generated from larger GSs ˆ ̺ by
PNR detection 48,60–62. The eﬀects of the optical setup
on such states can be modeled using the covariance for-
malism as described in Ref. 61. Consider a GS ˆ ̺ with
(M ′ +M ) modes, of which M modes are detected with
PNR detectors so that a state ˆ̺′ withM ′ modes remains.
By conditioning the further analysis of ˆ̺′ on the detected
PND, the non-Gaussian states are produced probabilis-
tically61. Unitary transformations U ′ acting on ˆ̺′ can
simply be modeled by applying the unitary transforma-
tion U = U ′ ⊗ ˆ11M×M to ˆ̺61. For the simulation, the
required PNR detection pattern on the M modes is ﬁxed
and the photon detection pattern of interest is applied to
the remaining M ′ modes. Unitary transformations that
are linear or quadratic in ˆa and ˆa† can be applied to ˆ̺ in
the covariance matrix formalism before the detection 61.
By using this procedure from Ref. 61, our method can be
directly applied to simulate states that can be obtained
from GSs via PNR detection.
To summarize, we note that our method to simu-
late the photon statistics of GSs can also be applied to
photon-added and photon-subtracted GSs as well as to
non-Gaussian states derived from larger GSs by PNR de-
tection. The class of states that can be simulated and the
range of possible applications of the simulation method
are thereby greatly extended.
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 6
D. Automatic diﬀerentiation for retrieval of probabilitie s
and moments
Multiple options exist to evaluate the derivatives of
the generating functions. One option used in Ref. 63 is
to use ﬁnite-diﬀerence approximations, but this method
can accumulate numerical inaccuracies. Another option
to retrieve probabilities from the generating function is to
approximate Cauchy’s integral formula on a circle around
the origin in the complex plane. In Ref. 64 this method
has been applied to probability generating functions and
error bounds for the approximations have been given. It
is extensively discussed in Ref. 65 and expressions for
moments and multi-dimensional distributions are given
in Refs. 66–68.
A versatile method to evaluate derivatives of func-
tions numerically is automatic diﬀerentiation (AD) 69,70.
AD breaks down a function to be diﬀerentiated into
elementary operations such as addition, multiplication,
or sin(x). The diﬀerentiation rules for these operations
are then applied and combined according to the chain
rule to the derivative of the overall function, which is
ﬁnally evaluated. For example, instead of approximat-
ing the derivative of sin(x) numerically, AD uses the fact
that the derivative is given by cos( x) and evaluates the
cosine function. Hence, in contrast to ﬁnite-diﬀerence
approximations, the derivatives obtained are accurate to
working precision.
Applying AD to the generating functions allows us
to readily calculate all the quantities we have derived.
Equations ( 7) to ( 11) as well as eqs. ( 21) and ( 22) only
involve derivatives and basic functions as well as linear
algebra that are easily implemented. With modern soft-
ware tools, multivariate higher-order derivatives can be
conveniently obtained with a few lines of code. From a
practical point of view, this is convenient because the user
is not confronted with the complexity of the calculation,
which is hidden in the repeated derivatives. AD thereby
greatly improves the practical usability of the generating
functions we derived. However, as mentioned in the intro-
duction, the computational complexity to calculate the
PND of GBS problems with state-of-the-art algorithms
scales exponentially with the number of photons, so that
the numerical evaluation of the derivatives of the gen-
erating function via AD will become infeasible for large
photon numbers.
A variety of AD software exists and an overview of
available tools is provided in Ref. 71. AD is widely used in
machine learning, for example for training artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks 72. Therefore, AD functionalities are part of
popular machine learning libraries such as PyTorch73,74
and TensorFlow75. Machine learning has gained consid-
erable attention during the past years and the range of
its applications is consistently growing. Consequently,
software for machine learning will be further developed
and it can therefore be expected that AD software will
gain further capabilities during the next years, which of
course is beneﬁcial for our application. State-of-the-art
machine learning libraries provide numerous possibilities
to optimize their performance, for example, using parallel
computing on graphic processing units (GPUs).
Throughout this paper, we use the autograd function
from the machine learning framework PyTorch 1.11.0
for AD. We use PyTorch in a very basic conﬁguration,
i.e. we do not use the option for acceleration by GPU
computations and the only setting we change is the de-
fault precision which we increase from ﬂoat32 to ﬂoat64.
All simulations are run on a regular desktop computer
to show that for small photon numbers, the generating
functions can be evaluated without much eﬀort, demon-
strating the practicability of our approach. In Ref. 37, we
present a straightforward code example to demonstrate
the use of PyTorch for computing the PND.
III. APPLICATION TO COMMON GAUSSIAN STATES
In this section, we apply our simulation method to
two common GSs with well-known photon statistics:
the single-mode displaced squeezed thermal state and
the two-mode squeezed vacuum with multiple squeezers.
These practical examples demonstrate that our simula-
tion method can easily take into account eﬀects such
as non-unity detection eﬃciencies, noise, and multiple
modes entering the same detector.
A. Photon number distribution of a single-mode displaced
squeezed thermal state
As a ﬁrst example, we consider the single-mode dis-
placed squeezed thermal state 6
ˆ̺ =D(α)S(χ)ˆ̺th(µth)S†(χ)D†(α) (23)
with displacement operator D(α) = exp(αˆa† −α∗ˆa) and
squeezing operator S(χ) = exp[( χˆa†2 −χ∗ˆa2)/2]. Here,
χ =r eiϑ is the squeezing parameter and
ˆ̺th(µth) =
∞∑
m=0
µthm
(1 +µth)m+1 |m⟩ ⟨m| (24)
is a thermal state with mean photon number µth6.
By using eq. ( 6), we derive an analytic expression for
the generating function 3:
G(w) = 1√
D
exp
(wE
2D
)
. (25)
3 The covariance matrix Γ for the state from eq. ( 23) is given by 6
(1 + 2µth)
[(1 0
0 1
)
cosh 2r +
(cos ϑ sin ϑ
sin ϑ − cos ϑ
)
sinh 2r
]
and the displacement vector is d =
√
2 [Re(α), Im(α)]T.
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 7
Here, we use the abbreviations
E = |α|2[w − 2 −w(1 + 2µth) cosh 2r]
+w(1 + 2µth) Re(α2 e−iϑ) sinh 2r and (26)
D = 1 −w +w2
( 1
2 +µth +µ2
th
)
− (1 + 2µth)
(w2
2 −w
)
cosh 2r. (27)
While an explicit expression for the PND can be de-
rived from this generating function, we do not present it
here as it can be found in Ref. 57 where it was derived by
using a diﬀerent approach. The photon statistics of the
single-mode squeezed thermal state, displaced squeezed
thermal state, and squeezed displaced thermal state have
been studied in Refs. 76 and 77.
As a simpliﬁcation, we now consider a single-mode
displaced squeezed state |ψ⟩ = D(α)S(χ) |0⟩, i.e. with
µth = 0, for which the PND is given by 57
p(n) = exp
(
−|α|2 + Re
(
α2 e−iϑ)
tanhr
) tanhnr
n!2n coshr
×
⏐⏐⏐⏐Hn
(α e−iϑ/2 sinhr −α∗ eiϑ/2 coshr
i
√
sinh 2r
)⏐⏐⏐⏐
2
,
(28)
where Hn is the n-th Hermite polynomial.
In ﬁg. 1, we verify that deriving the PND of the
state from the generating function eqs. ( 7) and ( 25) for
η1/2 = 1 and ν1/2 = 0 by AD yields the same results
as the analytic expression from eq. ( 28) within a toler-
ance of few units of least precision (ULP) of the analyt-
ical value. The maximum absolute value of the devia-
tion from eqs. ( 7) and ( 25) to the analytical result from
eq. ( 28) is 118 ULP, i.e. the relative error of the numeri-
cal results is less than 2 × 10−14 for both methods. This
is remarkable because for n = 11, computing the result
via eq. ( 7) already took a few minutes and required mul-
tiple GB of RAM, indicating a considerable number of
numerical operations. The fact that the result is nev-
ertheless numerically accurate underlines that the AD
capabilities of PyTorch well suit our simulation method.
The analytic formula has the advantage that it can be
quickly evaluated even for high photon numbers. But,
an advantage of our formulation with a generating func-
tion in terms of Λ and d is that eﬀects such as noise
and detection eﬃciencies can easily be taken into account
(c.f. ﬁg. 1).
B. Multi-mode spontaneous parametric down-conversion
A strength of our approach is that the detection statis-
tics of states with multiple modes entering the same de-
tector can be easily evaluated. For example, the spectral
degree of freedom can be incorporated into a simulation
by discretizing the frequency spectrum and treating each
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Number  of detected photons
−100
0
100
Dev . in ULP
eq. (7 ) )s. analytic
eq. (25) )s. analytic
0.0
0.2
0.4
p(n)
η = 1
η = 0.6
η = 0.4
0.0
0.2
0.4
p(n)
ν = 0 
ν = 0.25
ν = 0.5
FIG. 1. Eﬀect of Poissonian noise ν and detection eﬃciency η
on the detected photon number distribution of a displaced
squeezed state D(|α| eiϕ)S(r eiϑ) |0⟩ with |α|2 = 1.2, ϕ = 50°,
ϑ = 30 °, and r ≈ 1.287 chosen such that ⟨ ˆN ⟩ = 4 by
⟨ ˆN ⟩ = |α|2 + sinh 2(r)78. The upper diagram shows the re-
sults from eq. ( 7) for diﬀerent noise parameters ν and the
center diagram shows the inﬂuence of the eﬃciency η. The
bottom diagram shows the deviation in units of least precisi on
(ULP) of ﬂoat64 for the probabilities calculated from eq. ( 7)
and of the generating function eq. ( 25) from the analytical
value obtained via eq. ( 28).
frequency as a separate mode. For the simulation in sec-
tion IV we want to take into account the photon statis-
tics, but we do not resolve the frequency spectrum of the
SPDC process. Because the spectrum and the photon
statistics are related to each other, we recap some basic
properties of the multi-mode SPDC photon statistics.
SPDC with one signal mode s and one idler mode i
generates the two-mode squeezed vacuum (TMSV) state
|ψ⟩TMSV = exp(r eiϑˆa†
s ˆa†
i −r e−iϑˆasˆai) |0⟩ with mean pho-
ton number µ = sinh 2r which can be written as 4
|ψ⟩TMSV = sech(r)
∞∑
n=0
(eiϑ tanhr)n |ns⟩ |ni⟩. (29)
The photon statistics of either the signal
or idler mode alone is therefore given by
p(n) = sech 2(r) tanh2nr, i.e. resembles that of a
thermal state (cf. eq. ( 24)), with the probability gen-
erating function h(y) = sech 2(r)/(1 −y tanh2r)79. In
practice, the bandwidths of the parametric process and
the pump light result in two-mode squeezing between
a number M of pairs of orthogonal Schmidt modes
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 8
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Number of photon pairs
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
p(n)
thermal
M = 2
M = 4
M = 16
M = 256
P oisson
FIG. 2. Probability distribution of photon pairs produced b y
SPDC with mean photon number µ = 4 for diﬀerent numbers
of two-mode squeezers M with equal strengths. The distri-
bution changes from thermal statistics for a single two-mod e
squeezer to Poissonian statistics for inﬁnitely many two-m ode
squeezers. The distributions were obtained by AD of eq. ( 30).
determined by the Schmidt decomposition of the joint
spectral amplitude of signal and idler photons 63,79. The
resulting state is produced by applying M indepen-
dent two-mode squeezers to vacuum, each with thermal
statistics of photon pairs. Hence, the generating function
for the number of photon pairs is given by 79
h(y) =
M∏
i=1
sech2ri
1 −y tanh2ri
(30)
with ri eiϑi =C√λi/(iℏ). The constant C is determined
by the properties of the nonlinear medium and the pump
light and √λi is the i-th Schmidt coeﬀcient. For an in-
creasing number of equally strong squeezers, the PND
changes from thermal to Poissonian statistics 79 as shown
in ﬁg. 2.
As a further example for our simulation method,
we consider the bivariate photon statistics of SPDC
while taking into account noise and detection eﬃcien-
cies. First, we calculate the two-dimensional joint dis-
tributions p(nA,n B) for diﬀerent parameters of the de-
tection eﬃciencies and noise as well as the cumulative
distribution. The results obtained via our approach us-
ing the covariance matrix are shown in ﬁg. 3. It can be
seen that as expected, decreasing the detection eﬃciency
and adding noise blurs the line of delta functions that are
observed for the ideal state along the diagonal nA =nB.
Second, we use eq. ( 9) to analyze mixed moments of
the PND of a TMSV state in ﬁg. 4. For comparison,
analytic values for the mean values and the ﬁrst mixed
moment are shown. However, if the photon statistics are
more complicated e.g. due to loss, simultaneous detec-
tion of multiple modes, or noise, analytic expressions for
the moments may not be easy to ﬁnd, but can be eas-
ily calculated by applying AD to the moment-generating
FIG. 3. Joint PND p(nA, nB) for a state with a mean photon
pair number µ = 3 in 16 equally strong TMSV-modes with
(a) detection eﬃciencies ηA = ηB = 1, (b) ηA = 0 .8 and
ηB = 0 .9 and (c) eﬃciencies as in (b) and additional noise
parameters νA = 1 and νB = 2, scaled by a factor of 4 for
better visibility. (d) Cumulative PND p(NA = nA, NB ≤ nB)
with noise and eﬃciencies as in (b).
function eq. ( 9). In ﬁg. 4, we show the inﬂuence of loss
and noise on the moments.
To investigate the scaling of our method, we have
measured the run time for the PND computation from
ﬁg. 3(c) as a function of n2 with n1 = 0 and for dif-
ferent numbers of modes. As expected for a GBS com-
putation method, we observed an approximately expo-
nential increase in the run time with the photon num-
ber. On average, each additional photon prolonged the
run time by a factor of 2 .8 for 256 two-mode squeez-
ers and 3.5 for four two-mode squeezers. In comparison,
Hafnian-based algorithms achieve a scaling of O(N 32N/2)
for N photons33 and even faster methods have recently
been demonstrated 34. It is important to note that the
run time of our simulation method also grows with the
number of modes. However, computing p(n1 = 0,n 2 = 6)
for a 1024 ×1024 covariance matrix representing 256 two-
mode squeezers still took less than 13 s.
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 9
FIG. 4. Moments M =
⟨( ˆNA − ⟨ ˆNA⟩
)kA ( ˆNB − ⟨ ˆNB⟩
)kB ⟩
of the TMSV photon statistics with mean photon pair
number µ = 4 calculated via eq. ( 9) in logarith-
mic scale. raw: raw moments; central: central mo-
ments; analytic: analytic expressions for the mean values
⟨NA⟩ = ⟨NB⟩ = sinh 2 r and for the ﬁrst mixed moment⟨( ˆNA − ⟨ ˆNA⟩
)( ˆNB − ⟨ ˆNB⟩
)⟩
= sinh 2(2r)/478; imperfect:
central moments for an imperfect detector with ηA = 0 .5,
ηB = 0.3, νA = 1 and νB = 2.
IV. DETECTION PROBABILITIES FOR
ENTANGLEMENT-BASED QUANTUM KEY
DISTRIBUTION
For states and setups more complex than the exam-
ples considered above, analytical solutions can become
infeasible and numerical simulations are required. In
this section, we consider an application demonstrating
that by employing our method the photon statistics can
be simulated in a relatively simple way, even for com-
plex optical setups. We model a multi-user QKD system
recently published based on the BBM92 protocol 38. Al-
though the system uses non-PNR detectors, the photon
statistics are relevant as multi-photon pair emission is
an important eﬀect limiting the achievable quantum key
rates. Detection eﬃciencies and noise are taken into ac-
count. Imperfect interference is modeled by using the
mode mismatch model from Ref. 47. All these eﬀects are
readily included by using our simulation method.
A. Simulated setup for quantum key distribution
QKD enables the distribution of secure keys between
users based on information-theoretic principles from
quantum physics 2,80,81. The entanglement-based QKD
system for four users named Alice (A), Bob (B), Char-
lie (C), and Diana (D) 38 implements the BBM92 time-
bin protocol 82–87. Figure 5(a) shows the setup for the
users Alice and Bob. The setup for Charlie and Diana
is identical, but with diﬀerent values for parameters such
as insertion losses and coupling ratios as well as diﬀerent
detector properties.
The central component of the QKD system is a source
of time-bin entangled photon pairs. Laser pulses are sent
through an imbalanced interferometer, resulting in dou-
ble pulses with a time and phase diﬀerence given by
the interferometer’s path length imbalance. The dou-
ble pulses produce photon pairs by type-0 SPDC in a
nonlinear crystal. The mean photon pair number per
double pulse is µ ≈ 0.034. The spectral width of the
pump is much narrower than the photon frequency spec-
trum so that the photons are frequency-correlated: for a
pump frequency 2 ω0, energy conservation requires that
the frequencies of the signal and idler photon sum up to
ωs +ωi = 2ω0. The photons are separated by wavelength
demultiplexing (WDM). The phase matching function is
almost constant over several dozen nanometers so that
photons are produced in multiple pairs of 100 GHz-wide
WDM channels. A pair of users obtain entangled pho-
tons only if their wavelength channels are symmetrically
arranged around the center frequency ω0. Multiple user
pairs can thereby exchange quantum keys simultaneously
and independently and the user combinations can be re-
conﬁgured by changing the WDM channel assignments.
In the receiver station of each user, the photons pass
an interferometer with a path length diﬀerence matched
to that of the source’s interferometer. They are therefore
detected in one of three diﬀerent time bins, depending
on the path combination of the laser pulse and the pho-
tons in the interferometers. The quantum bit values in
the time basis are obtained from the arrival time of the
photons. When both photons are detected in the cen-
tral time bin, two-photon Franson interference 88 leads
to emission from correlated interferometer outputs and
the bit values in the phase basis are obtained from the
detector numbers 0 and 1 38,83,84.
However, various imperfections of the real setup lead
to bit errors. For example, the interferometer delays may
not be perfectly matched, the detectors have a non-zero
dark count probability and the beam splitters are not
ideal 50/50 splitters. The ratio of the number of bit er-
rors to the number of measured bits is called quantum
bit error rate (QBER). The higher the QBER, the lower
the secure key rate that can be extracted. A simulation
of the system can help to quantify the contribution of the
diﬀerent eﬀects to the QBER and to optimize the setup.
A higher value of µ, for example, yields a higher emis-
sion probability for photon pairs per laser pulse, resulting
in a higher bit rate. However, due to the statistical na-
ture of SPDC, increasing µ increases the probability of
multi-pair emission and thereby leads to a higher QBER.
Therefore, a simulation inevitably needs to take into ac-
count the eﬀect of multi-pair emission.
For the simulation, we treat the three time bins as
separate modes. The setup from ﬁg. 5(a) can thus be
unfolded as depicted in ﬁg. 5(b). It is divided into four
parts: state generation, propagation in ﬁbers and inter-
ferometers, imperfect interference with mode-mismatch
at the beam splitters A2 and B2, and detection in three
time bins. The state after the source interferometer is
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 10
L:
 ,  ,  :
SHG:
T:
 :
SPDC:
WDM:
losses
interferometer phases
second harmonic generation
beam splitter transmission
mode mismatch at beam splitter
spontaneous parametric down-conversion
wavelength-division multiplexing 
pulsed
Laser SHG
WDM
SPDC
 


Alice
Photon Source
Bob
B0
A0
A1
B1
TB2, 
B
TA2, 
B
LBL
LBS
LPL
LAL
LA
LB
LAS
TB1
TA1
TP2TP1
LPS
(a)
TA2, 	
A

LBSLB
LBLLB
LASLALALLA
TA1 TB1
TA2 TB2
A0
A0 B0
A1 B1
B0


LBLLBLALLA
TA1 TB1
TA2 TB2
A1
B1A1
B0A0
B1


TMSV(  S)


TMSV(  L)

LBSLB
LASLA
TB2, 
B
early time bin late time bin
central time bin
(b)
FIG. 5. (a) Schematic setup of our BBM92 quantum key distribu tion system from Ref. 38 consisting of a central entangled
photon pair source and receiver modules for two users Alice a nd Bob each comprising an imbalanced interferometer. Note t hat
here Mach-Zehnder interferometers are shown for clarity, b ut in practice, Michelson interferometers with Faraday mir rors are
used instead 38. Losses for all connections are modeled by introducing beam splitters coupling a fraction of the signal to an
auxiliary vacuum mode and tracing this mode out. (b) Unfolde d setup for the simulation. The SPDC pumped with double
pulses from the pump interferometer is modeled by setting up a pair of two-mode squeezed states with diﬀerent squeezing
parameters χS and χL. The diﬀerent time bins are modeled as separate modes and for the early, central, and late times
dedicated detectors are introduced. Imperfect interferen ce at the beam splitters is taken into account by using the mod e
mismatch model from Ref. 47.
modeled by initializing two TMSV states with covariance
matrices Γ TMSV(χS) and Γ TMSV(χL), where the beam
splitter asymmetries and losses in the arms of the source
interferometer are absorbed into the squeezing parame-
ters
χS =r0[TP1(1 −LPS)TP2]1/2 and (31)
χL =r0 eiϕ[(1 −TP1)(1 −LPL)(1 −TP2)]1/2. (32)
The coeﬃcientr0 is chosen such that both states together
have a certain mean photon pair number µ. The prop-
agation in the ﬁbers and interferometers is represented
by the state transformations for beam splitters, phase
shifts, and losses and the interference described by the
mode-mismatch model from 47 is also modeled by beam
splitters. Although the setup is complex, the construc-
tion of the ﬁnal covariance matrix is straightforward:
it is a combination of only four basic building blocks,
namely the covariance matrix of a TMSV state and the
Gaussian state transformations for beam splitters, phase
shifts, and losses. Combining the building blocks is sim-
ply achieved by multiplying the matrices representing
them. The representations of the most important Gaus-
sian states and their transformations can be found e.g. in
Refs.4–7,47 so that constructing a setup’s model becomes
a relatively simple task.
In ﬁg. 2, we have shown the eﬀect of the number of two-
mode squeezers on the photon statistics. To obtain re-
sults representing the correct photon statistics, we would
have to replicate the setup from ﬁg. 5(b) in the sim-
ulation for the correct number of two-mode squeezers,
each with its individual mean photon pair number. The
Schmidt number K can be used to estimate the num-
ber of two-mode squeezers based on the shape of the
joint spectral amplitude of the SPDC process 79,89,90. For
the simulation, we roughly estimate that K is in the or-
der of magnitude of 100 and we assume equally strong
two-mode squeezers resulting in almost Poissonian pho-
ton pair statistics. As the beam splitters and losses are
applied to all Schmidt modes, the covariance matrix is
block-diagonal with K identical blocks. Instead of di-
rectly calculating the determinant of this large matrix,
we apply the rule for block determinants and raise the
determinant of one block to the power of K = 100.
In the experiment, we use single-photon avalanche de-
tectors thoroughly analyzed in Ref. 91. Relevant pa-
rameters are the dead time τdead ≈ 10 μs, the eﬃ-
ciencyη ≈ 20 %, the after-pulse probability of a few per-
cent and the dark count rates in the range from 300 cps
to more than 3000 cps depending on the detector. The
ﬂexibility of our simulation method allows us to include
all these eﬀects in the model as described in appendix C.
B. Comparison of simulated key rates and error rates to
measurements
For the simulation, we have measured the values of all
relevant experimental parameters, i.e. for the beam split-
ter transmissions, propagation losses in the ﬁber links,
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 11
insertion losses of the components, and interferometer
mode mismatches. Then, we used these values to deter-
mine the parameters of the simulation model in ﬁg. 5(b).
For the detection eﬃciencies, dark count rates, and af-
terpulse probabilities of our detectors we have included
values obtained from tomographic measurements 91 in the
detection operators as described in appendix C.
We have simulated the sifted key rates and quantum
bit error rates by multiplying the source repetition rate
with the detection probabilities for key bits and quan-
tum bit errors in the time basis and phase basis. We
compare the results with the measurements we have re-
ported in Ref. 38 to check the validity of our simulation.
For these experiments, the mean photon pair number had
been set to µ = 0.034. For comparison, we consider the
time basis QBER instead of the overall QBER because in
the experiment the interferometer phases ﬂuctuate and
they are readjusted by tuning the interferometer temper-
atures as to minimize the phase basis QBER. Therefore,
the phase basis QBER is not necessarily always at the
minimum. Although it is possible to adjust the phases
in the simulation to mimic phase ﬂuctuations, we have
chosen the phases for optimal interference and compare
only the time QBER, which is unaﬀected by the phase
ﬂuctuations.
A comparison between the measured and simulated
sifted key rates and QBERs in the time basis is shown in
ﬁg. 6. The simulation represents both the dependence
of the key rates and of the time basis QBER on the
user combination and distance very well. The key rate
decreases with increasing distance between the partic-
ipants due to the increasing propagation losses as ex-
pected. Since for the distances involved and the chosen
pulse durations, dispersion is not signiﬁcant, the time
QBER is almost independent of the transmission distance
and transmission losses. However, the QBER variations
can be attributed to the individual dark count rates and
afterpulse probabilities of the detectors. Multiple eﬀects
lead to quantum bit errors in the time basis: uncorrelated
clicks from two noise counts can lead to coincidence. Or,
one photon from a pair may be lost and the other pho-
ton can be detected in coincidence with a noise count or
a photon from a diﬀerent pair. Investigating the diﬀerent
contributions helps to determine the eﬀects limiting the
secure key rate and optimizing the setup. Thus, PNR
simulations enable a detailed analysis of the diﬀerent ef-
fects contributing to the QBER, as we demonstrate in
section IV C.
C. Retrodictive analysis of the contribution of two-pair
emission to coincidences
The process to derive the initial quantum state from
the measurement outcome by applying Bayes’ theorem
is known as quantum retrodiction 92–95 and has been ap-
plied for example to imperfect detectors with non-unity
quantum eﬃciency and dark counts 96 as well as to beam
30 40 50 60 70
T otal distance between participants in km
0
1
2
3
Time QBER in % 0
50
100
150
Sifted k ey rate in bit/s
simulation
experiment (fig.  7) [38]   
AB CD AC BDAD BC
FIG. 6. Comparison of the experimental and simulated sifted
key rates and quantum bit error rates (QBERs) in the time
basis for diﬀerent transmission distances in the multi-use r
QKD network we have presented in Fig. 7 of Ref. 38. The er-
ror bars show the standard deviation of the measured values
over multiple runs. Diﬀerent combinations of the four users
Alice (A), Bob (B), Charlie (C), and Diana (D) exchange keys
pairwise. All parameters of the simulation such as the mean
photon pair number per pulse, insertion losses, detection e ﬃ-
ciencies, dark count rates, mode mismatches, and beam split -
ter coupling ratios were determined by measurements.
splitters and ampliﬁers 97. Bayes’ theorem states that the
conditional probability p(E1|E2) for event E1, given that
eventE2 occurred, can be calculated from
p(E1|E2) = p(E2|E1)p(E1)
p(E2) . (33)
The ability to simulate the photon number statistics
enables such retrodictive analysis of the quantum state,
i.e. it enables us to answer the question: Given that a
certain measurement result was observed, what is the
probability that it was produced by an initial quantum
state with a speciﬁc photon number?
PNR simulations with GSs as presented above can
be used to obtain p(E1|E2) when the probabilities
p(E1) and p(E2) can be obtained via the simulation
and p(E2|E1) is also accessible. Such retrodictive anal-
ysis enables the investigation of eﬀects that may not be
easily accessible by measurements. For example, the in-
ﬂuence of multi-photon pair emission on the QBER can
be compared to the contribution from noise counts. In-
stead of simulating the probability for multi-photon pair
production, it can be calculated for the photon statis-
tics of the pair source or it can be estimated by mea-
suring the heralded g(2) auto-correlation function of the
source98. Not all events in which multiple photon pairs
are produced lead to quantum bit errors and conversely,
not all quantum bit errors originate from multi-photon
pair emission. Using PNR simulation, these eﬀects can
be included systematically. However, for example, the
quantum bit errors originating from dark counts could
also be estimated without setting up such a simulation.
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 12
When each of the two pump pulses produces a photon
pair, Alice can detect a photon of the ﬁrst pair in the
early time bin and Bob can detect a photon of the second
pair in the late time bin, causing a quantum bit error in
the time basis. Here, we only want to brieﬂy illustrate the
method and for simplicity, we neglect the dependency of
the time bins in the same repetition cycle due to the dead
time among each other. Furthermore, we only consider
the contribution from up to one photon pair produced by
each pump pulse as well as raw coincidences between the
detectorsA0 andB0 instead of all exclusive coincidences
that would lead to error bits in the time basis.
Two photon pairs can only lead to an error in the time
basis when one pair was produced by the ﬁrst pump pulse
happening with probability p(f ), and the other one is
produced by the second pulse occurring with probabil-
ity p(s). Both values are obtained by simulating the
probability to obtain one photon pair directly after the
SPDC process. From Bayes’ theorem in eq. ( 33), the
probability can be calculated that when a coincidence be-
tweenA0,E and B0,L is measured, actually f and s pairs
were produced by the ﬁrst and second pulse, respectively:
p(f,s |A0,E,B 0,L) = p(A0,E,B 0,L|f,s )
p(A0,E,B 0,L) p(f,s ). (34)
The emission events are independent of each other,
so that p(f,s ) = p(f )p(s). The detections are inde-
pendent as well, so that in eq. ( 34) we can factorize
p
(
A0,E,B 0,L|f,s
)
=p(A0,E|f )p(B0,L|s). Here, p(A0,E|f )
is the probability that detector A0 is triggered in the
early time bin, given that f pairs have been produced in
the ﬁrst pump pulse. For f = 1 it can be simply obtained
by tracing the path of the photon through the setup to
calculate the total photon transmission probability TA0,E
to the detector including the beam splitter transmissions,
propagation losses, and the detector eﬃciency. The value
for p(B0,L|s) is similarly obtained:
p(A0,E|1) = pon,A0,E
(
1 − e−νA0,E (1 −TA0,E)
)
, (35)
p(B0,L|1) = pon,B0,L
(
1 − e−νB0,L (1 −TB0,L )
)
. (36)
Forf = 0 and s = 0, the detection probability is given
by the probability for a noise count, which is equiva-
lent to setting T = 0 in eqs. ( 35) and ( 36). Finally,
the raw time error coincidence probability p(A0,E,B 0,L)
is obtained from the simulation as well. Thereby, all
probabilities can be calculated that are required to
obtain p(f,s |A0,E,B 0,L) from eq. ( 34). In ﬁg. 7 we
showp(f,s |A0,E,B 0,L) as a function of the produced to-
tal mean number of photon pairs per repetition cycle µ
and for diﬀerent combinations of f and s.
For small values of µ below 1 × 10−3, the largest con-
tribution to the time basis error coincidence probabil-
ity p(A0,E,B 0,L) comes from coincidences between dark
counts. Coincidences involving one noise count and one
photon pair are relevant for a wide range of µ-values from
µ< 1 × 10−4 toµ> 1. The diﬀerence between the cases
f,s = 1, 0 and f,s = 0, 1 is mainly due to diﬀerent trans-
mission losses from the ﬁber lengths of 26 .9 km to Alice
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
10
1
Mean photon pair number /uni03BC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
p μ f , s  | A
0, E
, B
0, L
)
/uni03BC = 0.034 
      f, s
0, 0
1, 0
0, 1
1, 1
com.
FIG. 7. Probability p(f, s|A0,E, B0,L) that f pairs were pro-
duced by the ﬁrst pump pulse and s pairs by the second pump
pulse, given that a raw coincidence in A0,E and B0,L was ob-
served, for f, s ∈ { 0, 1}. Here, µ is the total produced mean
number of photon pairs per repetition cycle over both pump
pulses. By ’com.’ we denote the complementary probabil-
ity, i.e. the diﬀerence of the sum of the other shown prob-
abilities to one. It shows the contribution of pair numbers
where f ≥ 2 or s ≥ 2 to the raw coincidence probabil-
ity p(A0,E, B0,L). The dashed line marks the working point
µ = 0 .034 in Ref. 38 (cf. ﬁg. 6) with probabilities (from
f, s = 0, 0 to f, s = 1, 1) of 6 %, 13 %, 24 %, and 53 %.
and 50.0 km to Bob and due to the much higher dark
count probabilities for A0 of 3045 cps compared to B0
with 606 cps. The complementary probability in ﬁg. 7
shows that in the range around µ ≈ 0.1 and above, ef-
fects from more than one photon pair become relevant.
In the range of µ = 0.034 where the QKD setup is op-
erated, a majority of 53 % of the A0,E,B 0,L-coincidences
occur when each pump pulse produces one photon pair.
This underpins the fact that a simulation of the QKD sys-
tem should take into account eﬀects from multiple photon
pairs to produce accurate results for the QBERs.
V. DISCUSSION
In the previous sections, we have shown the versa-
tile applications of our expressions for the calculation of
the photon statistics of GSs. To the best of our knowl-
edge, we are the ﬁrst to derive expressions for cumula-
tive probabilities, moments, and factorial moments for
general multi-mode GSs. For the PND p(n), alterna-
tive calculation methods can be found in the literature.
One approach requires 2n derivatives to evaluate the pho-
ton number n. For that, Γ and d are expressed in the
complex ( ˆa, ˆa†)-basis instead of the real ( ˆx, ˆp)-basis via
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 13
σQ = Ω†Γ Ω/2 + 11/2 and τ = Ω†d. In our notation,
the expression reads 20,31
p(n) = 1
n!
√
det σQ
exp
(
− 1
2 τ †σ−1
Q τ
)
×
∏
i
( ∂ 2
∂αi∂α∗
i
)ni
exp
( 1
2 γTAγ + τ †σ−1
Q γ
)
(37)
with γT = (αT, α†) and A =
(
0 11N
11N 0
)
(112N − σ−1
Q ).
The exponential to be diﬀerentiated has been recog-
nized as the generating function for multivariate Hermite
polynomials and therefore, the PND can be expressed in
terms of these polynomials 99–101. However, these poly-
nomials are given by complex recursion formulas and the
expressions are therefore considered diﬃcult to evaluate
for higher numbers of photons 102–104.
For GSs with d = 0, eq. ( 37) can be rewritten in terms
of the Hafnian function as
p(n) = haf( AS)/
(
n!
√
det σQ
)
, (38)
where AS is derived from A by repeating rows and
columns, depending on the number of photons to be de-
tected in a particular mode 20,30,31,33. For states with
d ⁄= 0, a similar expression involves the loop Hafnian
function32,33,35,48. For non-PNR detection, the probabil-
ities involve the Torontonian and loop Torontonian func-
tion30,36. The software library The Walrus 105 provides
software related to GBS and has implemented algorithms
to evaluate these functions. In contrast to such highly
specialized algorithms, we use the general-purpose tool
of AD for our computations.
Generating operators for the photon statistics are
treated in textbooks such as Refs. 41 and 106. In Refs. 79
and 89, Mauerer et al. have applied AD to the generating
function from eq. ( 30) to obtain the PND resulting from
multiple two-mode squeezers. In Ref. 43, a probability-
generating function for TMSV states in terms of the
covariance matrix has been presented. However, gen-
erating functions in combination with AD, have rarely
been applied for practical calculations in the context of
photon statistics. A possible reason is that the evalua-
tion of higher-order derivatives is in general a resource-
intensive computational task so that analytical expres-
sions are preferred. But, for the calculation of the pho-
ton statistics, this is not an a-priori disadvantage, as the
required computational resources for GBS computations
scale exponentially even with optimized state-of-the-art
algorithms33,34. It can nevertheless be expected that spe-
cially tailored algorithms yield performance beneﬁts be-
coming relevant for higher photon numbers.
Often only the lowest few moments of probability dis-
tributions, such as to order 3 or 4 are considered, which
are easily evaluated by our method. For the PND, we
have been able to calculate photon numbers up to 10 to 12
without any optimizations. The simulations took a few
minutes and required multiple GB of RAM. By tuning
the parameters of PyTorch, by using diﬀerent AD soft-
ware or more powerful hardware, even higher numbers
of photons can be simulated. In the ﬁeld of GBS com-
plexity research, PNDs for considerably higher numbers
of photons have been computed on much more powerful
computers. For example, GBS probabilities have been
computed on a workstation with 96 CPUs for 50 pho-
tons in Ref. 32 or for up to 92 photons on a 100,000-core
supercomputer in Ref. 34.
However, quantum optics applications often consider
states with low mean photon numbers, for example
when coincidences are considered. An example is
entanglement-based QKD where µ ≪ 1 is required to
avoid quantum bit errors from coincidences between pho-
tons from diﬀerent pairs. The QKD system we have mod-
eled in section IV is operated with a mean photon pair
number per pulse around µ = 0.034 (cf. Ref. 38). For
such low mean photon numbers, only the ﬁrst few pho-
ton numbers are of practical relevance as the probabilities
of ﬁnding higher photon numbers decrease rapidly. Thus,
for many applications, a computational limitation to low
photon numbers is not a signiﬁcant restriction.
Another method to calculate the PND of GSs has re-
cently been presented in Ref. 63, where one of the major
results written in our notation is the expression
p(n) = (− 1)n
n! ∂n
y det
(
11 + Y (Γ − 11)Y
2
)−1/2⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐y=1
(39)
with Y = diag(w)⊕diag(w) andws = √yj. The authors
of Ref. 63 derive it by applying a fanning-out transforma-
tion to inﬁnitely many virtual non-PNR detectors, moti-
vated by the intuition that in this limiting case, the prob-
ability that any of these virtual detectors receives more
than one photon vanishes. Therefore, this approach for-
malizes the experimental approach to realize PNR detec-
tion by multiplexing multiple non-PNR detectors men-
tioned in section I. The expresssion from Ref. 63, given in
eq. (39), can be rewritten as a special case of our eq. ( 7),
which generalizes the result from Ref. 63 in multiple
ways: it already incorporates detection eﬃciencies and
noise counts and it can be applied to states with non-zero
displacement vector d. Besides eq. ( 7), our derivation
yields generating functions that enable the calculation
of the moments, cumulative probabilities, density matrix
elements, and factorial moments of the PND via eqs. ( 8)
to ( 11) and eqs. ( 14) to ( 15). Furthermore, our expres-
sions require, in contrast to eq. ( 37), only one derivative
per photon number facilitating the numerical evaluation.
While analytic expressions for the PND of single-mode
photon-added and photon-subtracted GSs have been re-
ported in Ref. 55–57, we have presented the more gen-
eral eqs. ( 21) and ( 22) which cover the multi-mode case
and which provide, besides the PND, also the cumulative
probabilities, moments, and factorial moments.
Conceptually, our generating-function approach pro-
vides a new point of view on photon statistics that is
diﬀerent from the Hafnian approach closely related to
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 14
graph theory, and also diﬀerent from the approach using
the fanning-out transformation. Therefore, it can be a
starting point for further theoretical investigation. For
example, the analytic generating functions could also be
analyzed for the complexity of their computation. An-
other example is the analytical generating function we
have presented for the single-mode displaced squeezed
thermal state.
We have shown that the ﬂexibility of our approach en-
ables us to easily incorporate imperfections such as noise
of arbitrary statistics, provided its generating functions
are known. In Ref. 63 it is noted that in comparison to
other formulas for PNR detection, such as eq. ( 37) or
eq. ( 38), an advantage of eq. ( 39) is that modes enter-
ing the same detector are treated by the same derivative,
whereas the alternative formulas treat all modes sepa-
rately so that terms for all the possible distribution pat-
terns of the photons over the modes in a detector have
to be calculated separately. In Ref. 63, this fact has been
used to incorporate the spectral modes into calculations
of the Hong-Ou-Mandel visibility of SPDC sources. The
same argument holds for our eqs. ( 7) to ( 11), which in-
volve one diﬀerentiation variable per detector, indepen-
dent of the number of modes entering it. This is because
our formulas obey the usual rules for generating functions
for probabilities and moments and, therefore, the convo-
lution of probability distributions is simply represented
by the multiplication of the generating functions.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We have presented various generating functions for the
photon statistics of multi-mode GSs in terms of the co-
variance matrix and displacement vector, from which
the probabilities, moments, and factorial moments are
retrieved by repeated AD. Common eﬀects in experi-
ments, such as noise, non-unity detection eﬃciency, and
the joint detection of multiple modes can be easily taken
into account. Furthermore, expressions for the generat-
ing functions of multi-mode photon-added and photon-
subtracted GSs are derived, relating them to the gener-
ating functions of the underlying GSs, thus greatly ex-
tending the range of its possible applications.
We have implemented AD by using the software frame-
work PyTorch to retrieve probabilities for photon num-
bers up to values of 12 on a desktop computer eﬀort-
lessly, without any optimization for performance. The
code for a simple example demonstrating the calculation
of a PND using PyTorch can be found in our technical
report Ref. 37.
As an application, we have modeled an entanglement-
based system for QKD which we have recently developed
and we have observed very good agreement between the
simulated and measured sifted key rates and quantum bit
error rates. Finally, we have used our PNR simulation of
the setup to analyze the fraction of quantum bit errors
due to the production of up to two photon pairs in the
same repetition cycle.
Our expressions for the generating functions in eqs. ( 7)
to ( 11) are formulated in terms of simple operations on
the covariance matrix and displacement vector of GSs.
Together with AD for the diﬀerentiation of the generat-
ing functions, this enables practical, easy-to-implement,
versatile simulations of quantum-optical setups.
The data that support the ﬁndings of this study are
available from the corresponding author upon request.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has been funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foun-
dation), under Grant No. SFB 1119–236615297. We
thank Philipp Kleinpaß for fruitful discussions about the
simulation of the QKD system. We also thank Julian
K. Nauth, Vladimir M. Stojanovi´ c and Gernot Alber for
valuable comments.
Appendix A: Basic properties of probability generating
functions and Gaussian states
In this section, we brieﬂy summarize basic properties
of general multi-mode GSs and of generating functions
for probability distributions.
1. The covariance formalism for the simulation of
Gaussian states
A photonic state with S modes can be de-
scribed by creation and annihilation operators ˆ a†
s
and ˆas with s = 1 ...S . The quadrature opera-
tors ˆxs = (ˆas + ˆa†
s)/
√
2 and ˆps = (ˆas − ˆa†
s)/i
√
2 can
be expressed in matrix notation as ˆq = Ωˆa with
ˆq =
(
ˆx1 ... ˆxS ˆp1 ... ˆpS
)T
, (A1)
ˆa =
(
ˆa1 ... ˆaS ˆa†
1 ... ˆa†
S
)T
, (A2)
with the basis-changing matrix Ω = 1√
2
(
11 11
−i11 i 11
)
and
with 11 denoting the S ×S identity matrix.
The characteristic function of an operator ˆO,
χ ˆO(ξ) = tr
( ˆO exp(iξT ˆq)
)
, (A3)
has 2S arguments that can be collected into the vector
ξT = ( ξT
x, ξT
p ) =
( ξx1...ξ xSξp1...ξ pS
)
. The expectation
value ⟨ ˆO⟩ w.r.t. a quantum state ˆ̺ can be written as 4,47
tr
(
ˆ̺ ˆO
)
= 1
(2π)S
∫
R2S
χ ˆ̺(ξ)χ ˆO(−ξ) dξ. (A4)
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 15
GSs are the states described by a Gaussian character-
istic function 4–6,47
χ ˆ̺(ξ) = exp
(
− 1
4 ξTΓ ξ + idTξ
)
, (A5)
with a real, symmetric 2 S × 2S covariance matrix Γ and
a displacement vector d deﬁned by 4
Γij = ⟨ˆqiˆqj + ˆqjˆqi⟩ −2 ⟨ˆqi⟩ ⟨ˆqj⟩ and di = ⟨ˆqi⟩. (A6)
Hamiltonians linear or quadratic in ˆa and ˆa† map GSs
to GSs 6 and can be expressed in matrix notation as
ˆH1 = ihT ˆa with h =
(
−α∗
α
)
and (A7)
ˆH2 = 1
2 ˆa†H ˆa with H =
(
X Y
Y ∗ X ∗
)
. (A8)
Here, Y = Y T as well as X = X † ensure that ˆH is Her-
mitian7. A unitary operation ˆU1,2 = e −i ˆH1,2 transforms ˆq
according to
ˆU †
1 ˆq ˆU1 = ˆq + ΩJh = ˆq + ˜d, (A9)
ˆU †
2 ˆq ˆU2 = S ˆq where S = Ω e−iKH Ω† (A10)
as well as J =
(
0 11
−11 0
)
and K =
(
11 0
0 −11
)
.
The characteristic function becomes
χ ˆ̺′ (ξ) = tr
( ˆU ˆ̺ ˆU † exp(iξT ˆq)
)
= tr
(
ˆ̺ exp(iξT ˆU †ˆq ˆU )
)
,
(A11)
resulting in transformations of Γ and d4–7:
ˆ̺′ = ˆU1 ˆ̺ ˆU †
1 ⇒ Γ ′ = Γ , d′ = d + ˜d (A12)
ˆ̺′ = ˆU2 ˆ̺ ˆU †
2 ⇒ Γ ′ = SΓ S T, d′ = Sd (A13)
Examples of such transformations are the phase shift
of a single mode and the coupling of two modes by a
lossless beam splitter.
2. Generating functions for probabilities and moments
The probability distribution of a non-negative integer-
valued random variable N can be encoded by a probabil-
ity generating function as 107
h(y) = ⟨yN ⟩ =
∞∑
n=0
p(N =n)yn (A14)
4 W e use the convention from Refs. 4,7,47, as our notation beneﬁts
from grouping x and p components together and the covariance
of the vacuum states simply becomes Γ = 11. The expressions
we derive will depend on Γ − 11. Other common conventions are
to arrange x and p in alternating order 5,6, to scale Γ by a factor
of 1/2 6,20,31, or to deﬁne Γ with complex elements with respect
to ˆa instead of ˆq7,20,31.
so that the probabilities p(n) and the mean ⟨N ⟩ can be
retrieved by
p(n) = 1
n!
dn
dynh(y)
⏐⏐⏐⏐
y=0
and (A15)
⟨N ⟩ =
∞∑
n=0
p(N =n)n = d
dyh(y)
⏐⏐⏐⏐y=1
. (A16)
The series in eq. ( A14) converges at least for y on the unit
disk because all p(n) are non-negative and ∑
np(n) = 1.
The cumulative probabilities p(N ≤n) are encoded by
a closely related generating function 107:
h(y)
1 −y =
∞∑
n,k=0
p(N =n)yn+k, (A17)
p(N ≤n) =
n∑
k=0
p(k) = 1
n!
dn
dyn
h(y)
1 −y
⏐⏐⏐⏐y=0
. (A18)
The moments M(k,µ ) = ⟨(N −µ)k⟩ of the probabil-
ity distribution can be encoded in a moment generating
function M (µ,y ) = ⟨exp[y(N −µ)]⟩107:
M (µ,y ) =
∞∑
n=0
p(n) ey(n−µ) =
∞∑
k=0
yk
k! ⟨(N −µ)k⟩, (A19)
M(k,µ ) = dk
dykMµ(y)
⏐⏐⏐⏐y=0
. (A20)
For µ = 0 or µ = ⟨N ⟩, M (µ,y ) generates the raw
moments ⟨N k⟩ or the central moments ⟨(N − ⟨N ⟩)k⟩.
It is sometimes convenient to study factorial
moments41,45,49,96,106. The falling factorial mo-
ments n(k) = ⟨N(k)⟩ = ⟨N (N − 1) · · · (N −k + 1)⟩ are
generated by ⟨(1 +y)N ⟩:
h(1 +y) =
∞∑
n=0
p(n)
n∑
k=0
yk
(n
k
)
=
∞∑
k=0
yk ⟨N(k)⟩
k! , (A21)
n(k) = dk
dykh(1 +y)
⏐⏐⏐⏐y=0
. (A22)
Similarly, a generating function for the rising factorial
moments n(k) = ⟨N (k)⟩ = ⟨(N + 1) · · ·(N +k)⟩ can be
deﬁned41,49:
R(y) =
∞∑
k=0
yk
k!
∞∑
n=0
p(n) (n +k)!
n! = 1
1 −y
⟨
(1 −y)−N⟩
,
(A23)
n(k) = dk
dykR(y)
⏐⏐⏐⏐y=0
. (A24)
In eq. ( A23) the following relation is used 108:
1
(1 −y)n+1 =
∞∑
k=0
(k +n)!
k!n! yk. (A25)
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 16
In the derivation of the generating functions for mul-
timode GSs, we use two important properties of such
generating functions. First, multivariate probability dis-
tributions are encoded by multivariate generating func-
tions. For example, the bivariate distribution p(n1,n 2)
is generated by h(y1,y 2) =∑
n1,n2p(n1,n 2)yn1
1 yn2
2 .
Second, the probability-generating or moment-
generating function for the sum of random variables is
the product of the probability-generating or moment-
generating functions of the individual random vari-
ables107. For example, the probability p(n) to detect
n photons in total, distributed over several modes
can be calculated from the product of the generating
functions hm(y) of all individual modes, sharing the
same parameter y:
p(n) = 1
n!
dn
dyn
∏
m
hm(y)
⏐⏐⏐⏐y=0
. (A26)
Note that when multiplying the generating functions
for cumulative probabilities and falling factorial mo-
ments, the power series in N is multiplied by the prefac-
tor (1 −y)−1 only once, not for each factor individually.
Appendix B: Derivation of generating functions for the
matrix elements and photon statistics
1. Derivation of the relation between g(u,v,w) and matrix
elements
In this section we derive expressions relating the matrix
elements of ˆ̺ to g(u,v,w ) = ⟨ˆg(u,v,w )⟩ from eq. ( 5) for
ˆg(u,v,w ) = :exp(uˆa+vˆa†−wˆa†ˆa):. We expand the quan-
tum state in the overcomplete basis of coherent states |α⟩
as ˆ̺ =
∫
CP (α) |α⟩ ⟨α| d2α with the Glauber–Sudarshan
P-function P (α) of the state. The expectation value of
a normally ordered function of creation and annihilation
operators F (ˆa†, ˆa) can be calculated by using the optical
equivalence theorem 41,106,109
tr(ˆ̺F (ˆa†, ˆa)) =
∫
C
P (α)F (α∗,α ) d2α. (B1)
Applying this result to the expectation value of ˆ g yields
⟨ˆg(u,v,w )⟩ =
∫
C
P (α) euα+vα∗−w|α|2
d2α. (B2)
We obtain the matrix elements of ˆ̺ in the basis of coher-
ent states and number states:
⟨α|ˆ̺|β⟩ =
∫
C
P (γ) ⟨α|γ⟩ ⟨γ|β⟩ d2γ
= e −(|α|2+|β|2)/2 ⟨ˆg(α∗,β, 1)⟩, (B3)
⟨n|ˆ̺|m⟩ =
∫
C
P (α) e−|α|2 αn
√
n!
α∗m
√
m!
d2α. (B4)
Our goal is to evaluate the derivatives numerically. For
m =n +∆m and∆m > 0, the number of derivatives can
be reduced from n +m to m by using
⟨n|ˆ̺|n +∆m⟩ = (−1)n
√
n!m!
∂ m
∂w n∂v ∆m
⟨ˆg(0,v,w )⟩
⏐⏐⏐⏐ v=0
w=1
,
(B5)
which is again directly evident from the phase space in-
tegral. Similar to eq. ( B5), ⟨m +∆n|ˆ̺|m⟩ can be cal-
culated for n > m by swapping the roles of u and v.
Equation ( B5) is especially useful for matrix elements
close to the diagonal as it then considerably reduces the
number of derivatives.
2. Derivation of G(u,v,w) in terms of covariance matrix
and displacement vector
We now derive the generating function in terms of
the covariance matrix and displacement vector. Insert-
ing ˆ11 = π−1∫
C |α⟩ ⟨α| d2α into eq. ( B1) allows us to
calculate the trace of normally ordered operators via
tr(F (ˆa†, ˆa)) = π−1∫
CF (α∗,α ) d2α. By applying the
Baker-Campbell-Haussdorf formula 41 and cyclic permu-
tation of the trace, we obtain the characteristic function
from the trace of a normally-ordered operator by
χˆg(ξ) = tr
(
ˆg ei(ξx ˆx+ξp ˆp))
= e (ξ2
x+ξ2
p)/4 tr
(
edˆa†
ˆg ecˆa)
(B6)
withc = (iξx +ξp)/
√
2 andd = (iξx −ξp)/
√
2. Separating
the real and imaginary parts of α =a + ib results in
tr
(
edˆa†
ˆg ecˆa)
= 1
π
∫
C
edα∗
euα+vα∗−w|α|2
ecα d2α
= 1
π
∫
R
e(d+v+c+u)a−wa2
da
∫
R
ei(c+u−d−v)b−wb2
db.
(B7)
Evaluating the complex Gaussian integrals yields
χˆg(ξ) = 1
w exp
(
− 1
2
2 −w
2w ξTξ − iζTξ + uv
w
)
with (B8)
ζ = 1
w
√
2
(
−(u +v)
i(v −u)
)
(B9)
and ξT = ( ξx,ξ p). By performing the above calcula-
tion for each mode separately, we generalize eq. ( B8)
to a multi-mode state with modes s = 1 ...S by deﬁn-
ing Z = ∑
susvsw−1
s and A = diag
( 2−w1
2w1
, · · ·, 2−wS
2wS
)
and extending ξ and ζ accordingly:
χˆg(ξ) = w− 1 exp
(
− 1
2 ξT(A ⊕ A)ξ − iζTξ +Z
)
.
(B10)
Here, the direct sum A ⊕ A = ( A 0
0 A ) is used to apply A
to the ξx and ξp components in ξ. By using eqs. ( A4)
and ( A5), we calculate G(u, v, w) = ⟨ˆg(u, v, w)⟩ for the
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 17
detection probabilities of a GS with characteristic func-
tion χ ˆ̺(ξ) = exp( −ξTΓ ξ/4 + idTξ) and obtain
G(u, v, w) = 1
(2π)S
∫
R2S
χ ˆ̺(ξ)χˆg(−ξ) dξ
= w− 1
(2π)S
∫
R2S
exp
(
− 1
2 ξTBξ + izTξ +Z
)
dξ (B11)
with B = Γ/2 + ( A ⊕ A) and z = d + ζ.
We absorb the prefactor w− 1 into a diagonal ma-
trix W = diag(w) ⊕ diag(w), solve the integral
∫
R2S
e−ξTBξ/2+izTξ dξ = (2π)S
√
det B
e−zTB−1z/2 (B12)
and use w− 1 = 1/
√
det W and Λ = W B. Thereby we
obtain eq. ( 6):
G(u, v, w) = exp(−zTΛ−1W z/2 +Z)√
det Λ
.
3. Derivation of the generating function for photon-added
states
To derive expressions for the photon statistics of
photon-added GSs, we consider tr(ˆ ̺ˆakˆgˆa†k) and in-
sert ˆ11 =∑
m |m⟩ ⟨m|:
tr
(
ˆ̺ˆakˆgˆa†k)
=
∞∑
n=0
∞∑
m=0
⟨n|ˆ̺|m⟩ ⟨m|ˆak ˆgˆa†k|n⟩(B13)
Evaluating the expansion of ˆg = exp(−wˆa†ˆa) yields
⟨m|ˆak ˆgˆa†k|n⟩ = (1 −w)n+k (n +k)!
n! δmn. (B14)
We insert the expression as a coeﬃcient into a generating
function, apply the relation from eq. ( A25) and insert
⟨n|ˆ̺|n⟩ = ⟨:exp(− ˆN ) ˆN n/n!:⟩ from eq. ( 1):
∞∑
k=0
rk
k! tr
(
ˆ̺ˆakˆgˆa†k)
=
∞∑
n,k=0
⟨n|ˆ̺|n⟩rk(1 −w)n+k (n +k)!
n!k!
=
∞∑
n=0
⟨n|ˆ̺|n⟩ (1 −w)n
(1 −r(1 −w))n+1
= 1
1 −r(1 −w)
⟨
:exp
( ˆN (1 −w)
1 −r(1 −w) − ˆN
)
:
⟩
. (B15)
Finally, we obtain with ˜w = 1 − [(1 −w)−1 −r]−1
tr(ˆ̺ˆak ˆgˆa†k) = dk
drk
G(0, 0, ˜w)
1 −r(1 −w)
⏐⏐⏐⏐r=0
. (B16)
Appendix C: Model for photon detection in the QKD setup
In general, a detector can be described by a positive
operator-valued measure (POVM), i.e. a set of positive
operators { ˆΠi} with ∑
i ˆΠi = ˆ11 so that the probabil-
ity to obtain result i is p(i) = ⟨ ˆΠi⟩. Our detectors are
non-PNR detectors, i.e. they can only yield two detec-
tion results: ”click” and ”no-click”. In our QKD setup,
we use the BBM92 protocol with time-bin entanglement.
The detection events of the entangled photons are there-
fore cast in an early, central, and late time-bin (cf. sec-
tion IV). Due to the dead time being much longer than
the time bins and the time separating them, the detector
cannot click in multiple time bins of the same repetition
cycle. For our detectors, we have therefore four mutually
exclusive results: Detection in the early (E), central (C),
and late (L) time bin as well as no click (no). The prob-
ability for a detector click in a particular interval is the
probability that non-zero clicks are registered, multiplied
by the probability pon that the detector is not in the
dead time. Hence, for the POVM elements we obtain
ˆ11 = ˆΠE + ˆΠC + ˆΠL + ˆΠno with
ˆΠE =pon ˆ11C,L
( ˆ11E − ˆΠNE=0
)
, (C1)
ˆΠC =pon ˆ11L ˆΠNE=0
( ˆ11C − ˆΠNC=0
)
, (C2)
ˆΠL =pon ˆΠNE,C=0
( ˆ11L − ˆΠNL=0
)
, (C3)
ˆΠno =poﬀ ˆ11 +pon ˆΠN =0. (C4)
Here, we abbreviate the index NE,C,L =N , indicating all
time bins together. The probability that the detector is
live, i.e. not during its dead time τdead at a given point in
time, is given by pon = 1 −poﬀ . The operators ˆΠNE=0 in
eq. ( C2) and ˆΠNE,C=0 in eq. ( C3) take into account that
due to the dead time, a click switches the detector oﬀ in
the subsequent time bins of the same repetition cycle.
To include eﬀects from afterpulses and dark counts
occurring with the dark count rate rdark and to calcu-
late pon, we ﬁrst consider the simple case of a detector
showing some Poissonian noise ν but exhibiting no dead
time. We deﬁne the noise rate rnoise =rdark +papr, click
rate r =pclickfrep and click probability
pclick = ⟨ˆ11 − ˆΠN =0⟩ = 1 − exp(−ν)√
det Λ
(C5)
with ν = rnoise/frep. Here, frep is the repetition rate of
the photon pair source, i.e. ν and pclick are deﬁned for
a time interval of one repetition cycle. The afterpulse
probability pap is the probability that a click triggers
a subsequent uncorrelated click. Here, only modes of
the covariance matrix are kept in Λ which enter the de-
tector, while the columns and rows corresponding to all
other modes are removed. This means that on the one
hand rnoise depends on the click rate and on the other
hand the click rate also depends on the noise. A self-
consistent value for rnoise can be obtained by solving
rnoise =rdark +papfrep
(
1 − exp(−rnoise/frep)√
det Λ
)
(C6)
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 18
forrnoise. Linearizing the exponential for rnoise/frep ≪ 1
yields
rnoise ≈
rdark +papfrep
(
1 − 1/
√
det Λ
)
1 −pap/
√
det Λ
. (C7)
This approximation is justiﬁed because the values
for rnoise/frep are in the order of 1 × 10−5 for our setup
operated at values of µ ≈ 0.034. From eq. ( C5), we
obtain the click rate r including afterpulses. The noise
parameter for detection in a time bin of width ∆T = 1 ns
is then given by νtime bin =rnoise∆T .
Finally, we consider the eﬀect of the dead time τdead.
Thus, we introduce the measured click rate rm blocking
a fraction poﬀ =rmτdead of the acquisition time. We can
now calculate pon = 1 −rmτdead. Furthermore, the mea-
sured click rate is simply the product rm =ponr leading
topon = 1/(1 +rτdead), which can be directly calculated
from the click rate.
For coincidences between detectors, we distinguish be-
tween raw and exclusive coincidences. By coincidences,
we mean events where at least two detectors click in the
same repetition cycle. While raw coincidences only con-
sider that two detectors click, exclusive coincidences also
require that the two other detectors do not click. For
QKD, we use only those events for which an unambiguous
bit value can be derived, i.e. only exclusive coincidences.
Note that for the security of the key exchange, it is rec-
ommended that the participant observing clicks in both
detectors randomly assigns one of the values 2,110, but for
the sake of simplicity of the simulation, we work with
exclusive coincidences which exclude such double-clicks.
The exclusive coincidence probabilities, for example be-
tween detectors A0 in time bin i and B0 in time bin j
with i,j ∈ {E,C,L }, are given by
pA0,i,B0,j , excl. =
⟨ ˆΠA0,i
ˆΠB0,j
ˆΠA1,no
ˆΠB1,no
⟩
. (C8)
As each detection operator consists of two terms
(cf. eq. ( C5)), expanding eq. ( C8) yields 16 terms.
To simplify the comparison of the simulation with the
measured key rates, we approximate eq. ( C4):
ˆΠno = ˆΠN =0 +poﬀ (ˆ11 − ˆΠN =0) ≈ ˆΠN =0. (C9)
This approximation is valid when poﬀ ≪ 1 or when
ˆΠN =0 ≈ ˆ11, which is the case because the click proba-
bility is low due to the detection eﬃciency of η = 20 %
and due to the transmission losses. Using this approxi-
mation reduces the number of terms from 16 to 4. As an
example, consider exclusive coincidences between detec-
torA0 in the early time bin and B0 in the late time bin.
By using eq. ( C9), the exclusive coincidence probability
becomes
pclick(A0,E ,B0,L), excl.
=pA0,onpB0,on
⟨( ˆ11A0,E − ˆΠN (A0,E)=0
)
× ˆΠN (B0,E,CA1B1)=0
( ˆ11B0,L − ˆΠN (B0,L)=0
)⟩
≈pA0,onpB0,on exp(−νB0,E,C −νA1 −νB1 )
×
(
1√det ΛB0,E,CA1B1
− exp(−νA0,E)√det ΛA0,EB0,E,CA1B1
− exp(−νB0,L )√
det ΛB0A1B1
+ exp(−νA0,E −νB0,L )√det ΛA0,EB0A1B1
)
.
(C10)
In the experiment, the photons have been sep-
arated by WDM with an arrayed-waveguide grat-
ing, for which we have measured the wavelength-
dependent transmission τ (ω) of Alice’s and Bob’s chan-
nels CA and CB with channel widths ∆. In the sim-
ulation, we have included the averaged transmissions
τA/B = ∆−1∫
CA/B
τ (ω) dω into the losses LA and LB.
Due to the photon frequency correlation, the aver-
age transmission probability for a photon pair is not
τAτB but τpair = ∆−1∫
CA
τ (ω)τ (2ω0 − ω) dω. We,
therefore, multiply the key rate by the correction fac-
torτpair/(τAτB) ≈ 1.5 to take the spectral dependence of
the channel loss into account.
REFERENCES
1E. Knill, R. Laﬂamme, and G. J. Milburn, “A scheme for ef-
ﬁcient quantum computation with linear optics,” Nature 409,
46–52 (2001) .
2F. Xu, X. Ma, Q. Zhang, H.-K. Lo, and J.-W. Pan, “Secure
quantum key distribution with realistic devices,” Rev. Mod.
Phys. 92, 025002 (2020) .
3P.-A. Moreau, E. Toninelli, T. Gregory, and M. J. Padgett,
“Imaging with quantum states of light,” Nature Reviews Physics
1, 367–380 (2019) .
4X.-B. W ang, T. Hiroshima, A. Tomita, and M. Hayashi, “Quan-
tum information with gaussian states,” Physics Reports 448,
1–111 (2007) .
5C. W eedbrook, S. Pirandola, R. Garc ´ ıa-Patr´ on, N. J. Cerf,T. C.
Ralph, J. H. Shapiro, and S. Lloyd, “Gaussian quantum infor-
mation,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 621–669 (2012) .
6S. Olivares, “Quantum optics in the phase space,” The European
Physical Journal Special Topics 203, 3–24 (2012) .
7G. Adesso, S. Ragy, and A. R. Lee, “Continuous variable quan-
tum information: Gaussian states and beyond,” Open Systems
& Information Dynamics 21, 1440001 (2014) .
8A. Divochiy, F. Marsili, D. Bitauld, A. Gaggero, R. Leoni,
F. Mattioli, A. Korneev, V. Seleznev, N. Kaurova, O. Minaeva ,
G. Gol’tsman, K. G. Lagoudakis, M. Benkhaoul, F. L´ evy, and
A. Fiore, “Superconducting nanowire photon-number-resol ving
detector at telecommunication wavelengths,” Nature Photonics
2, 302–306 (2008) .
9M. Schmidt, M. von Helversen, M. L´ opez, F. Gericke,
E. Schlottmann, T. Heindel, S. K¨ uck, S. Reitzenstein, and
J. Beyer, “Photon-number-resolving transition-edge sens ors for
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 19
the metrology of quantum light sources,” Journal of Low Tem-
perature Physics 193, 1243–1250 (2018) .
10C. Cahall, K. L. Nicolich, N. T. Islam, G. P. Lafyatis, A. J.
Miller, D. J. Gauthier, and J. Kim, “Multi-photon detection
using a conventional superconducting nanowire single-pho ton
detector,” Optica 4, 1534–1535 (2017) .
11X. Tao, S. Chen, Y. Chen, L. W ang, X. Li, X. Tu, X. Jia,
Q. Zhao, L. Zhang, L. Kang, and P. W u, “A high speed and high
eﬃciency superconducting photon number resolving detecto r,”
Superconductor Science and Technology 32, 064002 (2019) .
12S. Steinhauer, S. Gyger, and V. Zwiller, “Progress on large-
scale superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors, ” Ap-
plied Physics Letters 118, 100501 (2021) .
13G. He, H. Li, R. Yin, L. Zhang, D. Dong, J. Lv, Y. Fei, X. W ang,
Q. Chen, F. Li, H. Li, H. W ang, X. Tu, Q. Zhao, X. Jia,
J. Chen, L. Kang, and P. W u, “Simultaneous resolution of pho-
ton numbers and positions with series-connected supercond uct-
ing nanowires,” Applied Physics Letters 120, 124001 (2022) .
14R. Cheng, Y. Zhou, S. W ang, M. Shen, T. Taher, and
H. X. Tang, “A 100-pixel photon-number-resolving detec-
tor unveiling photon statistics,” Nature Photonics (2022),
10.1038/s41566-022-01119-3.
15ID Quantique SA, “”id281 superconducting nanowire series”,”
(2022), product Brochure.
16D. Achilles, C. Silberhorn, C. Sliwa, K. Banaszek, I. A. W alm s-
ley, M. J. Fitch, B. C. Jacobs, T. B. Pittman, and J. D. Franson ,
“Photon-number-resolving detection using time-multiple xing,”
Journal of Modern Optics 51, 1499–1515 (2004) .
17R. Kruse, J. Tiedau, T. J. Bartley, S. Barkhofen, and
C. Silberhorn, “Limits of the time-multiplexed photon-cou nting
method,” Phys. Rev. A 95, 023815 (2017) .
18R. Heilmann, J. Sperling, A. Perez-Leija, M. Gr¨ afe, M. Heinrich,
S. Nolte, W. Vogel, and A. Szameit, “Harnessing click detec-
tors for the genuine characterization of light states,” Scientiﬁc
Reports 6, 19489 (2016) .
19J. Sperling, W. Vogel, and G. S. Agarwal, “True photocountin g
statistics of multiple on-oﬀ detectors,” Phys. Rev. A 85, 023820
(2012).
20C. S. Hamilton, R. Kruse, L. Sansoni, S. Barkhofen, C. Silber -
horn, and I. Jex, “Gaussian boson sampling,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
119, 170501 (2017) .
21M. Tillmann, B. Daki´ c, R. Heilmann, S. Nolte, A. Szameit, an d
P. W alther, “Experimental boson sampling,” Nature Photonics
7, 540–544 (2013) .
22M. A. Broome, A. Fedrizzi, S. Rahimi-Keshari, J. Dove,
S. Aaronson, T. C. Ralph, and A. G. White, “Photonic boson
sampling in a tunable circuit,” Science 339, 794–798 (2013) .
23D. J. Brod, E. F. Galv˜ ao, A. Crespi, R. Osellame, N. Spagnolo ,
and F. Sciarrino, “Photonic implementation of boson sampli ng:
a review,” Advanced Photonics 1, 1 – 14 (2019) .
24H.-S. Zhong, H. W ang, Y.-H. Deng, M.-C. Chen, L.-C. Peng, Y.-
H. Luo, J. Qin, D. W u, X. Ding, Y. Hu, P. Hu, X.-Y. Yang, W.-J.
Zhang, H. Li, Y. Li, X. Jiang, L. Gan, G. Yang, L. You, Z. W ang,
L. Li, N.-L. Liu, C.-Y. Lu, and J.-W. Pan, “Quantum com-
putational advantage using photons,” Science 370, 1460–1463
(2020).
25H.-S. Zhong, Y.-H. Deng, J. Qin, H. W ang, M.-C. Chen, L.-C.
Peng, Y.-H. Luo, D. W u, S.-Q. Gong, H. Su, Y. Hu, P. Hu, X.-
Y. Yang, W.-J. Zhang, H. Li, Y. Li, X. Jiang, L. Gan, G. Yang,
L. You, Z. W ang, L. Li, N.-L. Liu, J. J. Renema, C.-Y. Lu,
and J.-W. Pan, “Phase-programmable gaussian boson samplin g
using stimulated squeezed light,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 180502
(2021).
26T. R. Bromley, J. M. Arrazola, S. Jahangiri, J. Izaac, N. Que-
sada, A. D. Gran, M. Schuld, J. Swinarton, Z. Zabaneh, and
N. Killoran, “Applications of near-term photonic quantum c om-
puters: software and algorithms,” Quantum Science and Tech-
nology 5, 034010 (2020) .
27S. Aaronson and A. Arkhipov, “The computational complex-
ity of linear optics,” in Proceedings of the Forty-Third Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , STOC ’11 (Associ-
ation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2011) p.
333–342.
28A. P. Lund, A. Laing, S. Rahimi-Keshari, T. Rudolph, J. L.
O’Brien, and T. C. Ralph, “Boson sampling from a gaussian
state,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 100502 (2014) .
29S. Rahimi-Keshari, A. P. Lund, and T. C. Ralph, “What can
quantum optics say about computational complexity theory? ”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 060501 (2015) .
30N. Quesada, J. M. Arrazola, and N. Killoran, “Gaussian boson
sampling using threshold detectors,” Phys. Rev. A 98, 062322
(2018).
31R. Kruse, C. S. Hamilton, L. Sansoni, S. Barkhofen, C. Silber -
horn, and I. Jex, “Detailed study of gaussian boson sampling ,”
Phys. Rev. A 100, 032326 (2019) .
32N. Quesada, R. S. Chadwick, B. A. Bell, J. M. Arrazola, T. Vin-
cent, H. Qi, and R. Garc ´ ıa − Patr´ on, “Quadratic speed-up for
simulating gaussian boson sampling,” PRX Quantum 3, 010306
(2022).
33A. Bj¨ orklund, B. Gupt, and N. Quesada, “A faster hafnian for -
mula for complex matrices and its benchmarking on a supercom -
puter,” ACM J. Exp. Algorithmics 24 (2019), 10.1145/3325111.
34J. F. F. Bulmer, B. A. Bell, R. S. Chadwick, A. E. Jones,
D. Moise, A. Rigazzi, J. Thorbecke, U.-U. Haus, T. V. Vaeren-
bergh, R. B. Patel, I. A. W almsley, and A. Laing, “The bound-
ary for quantum advantage in gaussian boson sampling,” Science
Advances 8, eabl9236 (2022) .
35N. Quesada, “Franck-condon factors by counting perfect mat ch-
ings of graphs with loops,” The Journal of Chemical Physics
150, 164113 (2019) .
36J. F. F. Bulmer, S. Paesani, R. S. Chadwick, and N. Quesada,
“Threshold detection statistics of bosonic states,” Phys. Rev. A
106, 043712 (2022) .
37E. Fitzke, F. Niederschuh, and T. W alther, “Simulat-
ing the photon statistics of gaussian states employing au-
tomatic diﬀerentiation from pytorch,” Technical Report,
https://doi.org/10.26083/tuprints-00023061 (2022).
38E. Fitzke, L. Bialowons, T. Dolejsky, M. Tippmann, O. Niki-
forov, T. W alther, F. Wissel, and M. Gunkel, “Scalable net-
work for simultaneous pairwise quantum key distribution vi a
entanglement-based time-bin coding,” PRX Quantum 3, 020341
(2022).
39P. L. Kelley and W. H. Kleiner, “Theory of electromagnetic ﬁe ld
measurement and photoelectron counting,” Phys. Rev. 136,
A316–A334 (1964) .
40M. Lax and M. Zwanziger, “Exact photocount statistics: Lase rs
near threshold,” Phys. Rev. A 7, 750–771 (1973) .
41L. Mandel and E. W olf, Optical Coherence and Quantum Optics
- (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995).
42D. W alls and G. J. Milburn, Quantum Optics , 2nd ed. (Springer,
2008).
43J. K. Nauth, “Full time-dependent counting statistics of hi ghly
entangled biphoton states,” Phys. Rev. A 106, 053716 (2022) .
44J. Eisert and M. M. W olf, “Gaussian quantum channels,” (Im-
perial College Press, distributed by W old Scientiﬁc Publis hing
Co., 2007) pp. 23–42, 0.
45G. Adam, “Density matrix elements and moments for gener-
alized gaussian state ﬁelds,” Journal of Modern Optics 42,
1311–1328 (1995) .
46J. Perina, Quantum Statistics of Linear and Nonlinear Optical
Phenomena, 2nd ed. (Springer Science & Business Media, 1991).
47M. Takeoka, R.-B. Jin, and M. Sasaki, “Full analysis of multi -
photon pair eﬀects in spontaneous parametric down conversi on
based photonic quantum information processing,” New Journal
of Physics 17, 043030 (2015) .
48N. Quesada, L. G. Helt, J. Izaac, J. M. Arrazola,
R. Shahrokhshahi, C. R. Myers, and K. K. Sabapathy, “Sim-
ulating realistic non-gaussian state preparation,” Phys. Rev. A
100, 022341 (2019) .
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 20
49S. M. Barnett, G. Ferenczi, C. R. Gilson, and F. C. Speir-
its, “Statistics of photon-subtracted and photon-added st ates,”
Phys. Rev. A 98, 013809 (2018) .
50Y. I. Bogdanov, K. G. Katamadze, G. V. Avosopiants, L. V.
Belinsky, N. A. Bogdanova, A. A. Kalinkin, and S. P. Kulik,
“Multiphoton subtracted thermal states: Description, pre para-
tion, and reconstruction,” Phys. Rev. A 96, 063803 (2017) .
51A. Zavatta, V. Parigi, M. S. Kim, and M. Bellini, “Subtractin g
photons from arbitrary light ﬁelds: experimental test of co herent
state invariance by single-photon annihilation,” New Journal of
Physics 10, 123006 (2008) .
52A. Zavatta, S. Viciani, and M. Bellini, “Quantum-to-classi cal
transition with single-photon-added coherent states of li ght,”
Science 306, 660–662 (2004) .
53V. Parigi, A. Zavatta, and M. Bellini, “Implementation of
single-photon creation and annihilation operators: exper imental
issues in their application to thermal states of light,” Journal of
Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 42, 114005
(2009).
54D. Liu, M. Tian, S. Liu, X. Dong, J. Guo, Q. He, H. Xu, and
Z. Li, “Ghost imaging with non-gaussian quantum light,” Phys.
Rev. Applied 16, 064037 (2021) .
55X. xiang Xu, L. yun Hu, and H. yi Fan, “Photon-added squeezed
thermal states: Statistical properties and its decoherenc e in a
photon-loss channel,” Optics Communications 283, 1801–1809
(2010).
56Z. W ang, X. guo Meng, and H. yi Fan, “Photon-subtracted
squeezed coherent state: nonclassicality and decoherence in
thermal environment,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 29, 397–406 (2012) .
57S. W ang, H. yi Fan, and L. yun Hu, “Photon-number distri-
butions of non-gaussian states generated by photon subtrac tion
and addition,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 29, 1020–1028 (2012) .
58I. Ghiu, P. Marian, and T. A. Marian, “Measures of non-
gaussianity for one-mode ﬁeld states,” Physica Scripta T153,
014028 (2013) .
59I. Ghiu, P. Marian, and T. A. Marian, “Loss of non-gaussianit y
for damped photon-subtracted thermal states,” Physica Scripta
T160, 014014 (2014) .
60Y. Zhai, F. E. Becerra, B. L. Glebov, J. W en, A. E. Lita,
B. Calkins, T. Gerrits, J. Fan, S. W. Nam, and A. Migdall,
“Photon-number-resolved detection of photon-subtracted ther-
mal light,” Opt. Lett. 38, 2171–2173 (2013) .
61D. Su, C. R. Myers, and K. K. Sabapathy, “Conversion of
gaussian states to non-gaussian states using photon-numbe r-
resolving detectors,” Phys. Rev. A 100, 052301 (2019) .
62C. N. Gagatsos and S. Guha, “Eﬃcient representation of gaus-
sian states for multimode non-gaussian quantum state engin eer-
ing via subtraction of arbitrary number of photons,” Phys. Rev.
A 99, 053816 (2019) .
63O. F. Thomas, W. McCutcheon, and D. P. S. McCutcheon,
“A general framework for multimode gaussian quantum optics
and photo-detection: Application to hong-ou-mandel inter fer-
ence with ﬁltered heralded single photon sources,” APL Pho-
tonics 6, 040801 (2021) .
64J. Abate and W. Whitt, “Numerical inversion of probability
generating functions,” Operations Research Letters 12, 245–251
(1992).
65J. Abate and W. Whitt, “The fourier-series method for invert ing
transforms of probability distributions,” Queueing Systems 10,
5–87 (1992) .
66G. L. Choudhury, D. M. Lucantoni, and W. Whitt, “Multidi-
mensional transform inversion with applications to the tra nsient
m/g/1 queue,” The Annals of Applied Probability 4, 719–740
(1994).
67G. L. Choudhury and W. Whitt, “Computing distributions and
moments in polling models by numerical transform inversion ,”
Performance Evaluation 25, 267–292 (1996) .
68G. L. Choudhury and D. M. Lucantoni, “Numerical computa-
tion of the moments of a probability distribution from its tr ans-
form,” Operations Research 44, 368–381 (1996) .
69A. Griewank and A. W alther, Evaluating Derivatives , 2nd ed.
(Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2008).
70U. Naumann, The Art of Diﬀerentiating Computer Pro-
grams - An Introduction to Algorithmic Diﬀerentiation (SIAM,
Philadelphia, 2012).
71“Community portal for automatic diﬀerentiation,”
https://www.autodiff.org (2022), accessed: 2022-07-09.
72A. G. Baydin, B. A. Pearlmutter, A. A. Radul, and J. M.
Siskind, “Automatic diﬀerentiation in machine learning: a sur-
vey,” Journal of Machine Learning Research 18, 1–43 (2018) .
73A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. De-
Vito, Z. Lin, A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer, “Auto-
matic diﬀerentiation in pytorch,” in NIPS-W (2017).
74A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury,
G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. De s-
maison, A. Kopf, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani,
S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner, L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala ,
“Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep lear n-
ing library,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems 32 , edited by H. W allach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
F. d 'Alch´ e-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (Curran Associates,
Inc., 2019) pp. 8024–8035.
75M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo, Z. Chen,
C. Citro, G. S. Corrado, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghe-
mawat, I. Goodfellow, A. Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y. Jia,
R. Jozefowicz, L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Man´ e,
R. Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah, M. Schuster, J. Shlens ,
B. Steiner, I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P. Tucker, V. Vanhoucke ,
V. Vasudevan, F. Vi´ egas, O. Vinyals, P. W arden, M. W atten-
berg, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, and X. Zheng, “TensorFlow: Large-scale
machine learning on heterogeneous systems,” (2015), software
available from tensorﬂow.org.
76P. Marian, “Higher-order squeezing and photon statistics f or
squeezed thermal states,” Phys. Rev. A 45, 2044–2051 (1992) .
77P. Marian and T. A. Marian, “Squeezed states with thermal
noise. i. photon-number statistics,” Phys. Rev. A 47, 4474–4486
(1993).
78C. Gerry and P. Knight, Introductory Quantum Optics (Cam-
bridge University Press, 2004).
79W. Mauerer, M. Avenhaus, W. Helwig, and C. Silberhorn,
“How colors inﬂuence numbers: Photon statistics of paramet ric
down-conversion,” Phys. Rev. A 80, 053815 (2009) .
80N. Gisin, G. Ribordy, W. Tittel, and H. Zbinden, “Quantum
cryptography,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 145–195 (2002) .
81V. Scarani, H. Bechmann-Pasquinucci, N. J. Cerf, M. Duˇ sek,
N. L¨ utkenhaus, and M. Peev, “The security of practical quan -
tum key distribution,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 1301–1350 (2009) .
82C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, and N. D. Mermin, “Quantum
cryptography without bell’s theorem,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 68,
557–559 (1992) .
83J. Brendel, N. Gisin, W. Tittel, and H. Zbinden, “Pulsed
energy-time entangled twin-photon source for quantum comm u-
nication,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 2594–2597 (1999) .
84W. Tittel, J. Brendel, H. Zbinden, and N. Gisin, “Quan-
tum cryptography using entangled photons in energy-time be ll
states,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4737–4740 (2000) .
85I. Marcikic, H. de Riedmatten, W. Tittel, H. Zbinden, M. Legr ´ e,
and N. Gisin, “Distribution of time-bin entangled qubits ov er 50
km of optical ﬁber,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 180502 (2004) .
86T. Honjo, S. W. Nam, H. Takesue, Q. Zhang, H. Kamada,
Y. Nishida, O. Tadanaga, M. Asobe, B. Baek, R. Hadﬁeld,
S. Miki, M. Fujiwara, M. Sasaki, Z. W ang, K. Inoue, and Y. Ya-
mamoto, “Long-distance entanglement-based quantum key di s-
tribution over optical ﬁber,” Opt. Express 16, 19118–19126
(2008).
87H. Takesue, K. ichi Harada, K. Tamaki, H. Fukuda,
T. Tsuchizawa, T. W atanabe, K. Yamada, and S. ichi
Itabashi, “Long-distance entanglement-based quantum key dis-
tribution experiment using practical detectors,” Opt. Express
18, 16777–16787 (2010) .
Simulating the Photon Statistics of Multimode Gaussian States 21
88J. D. Franson, “Bell inequality for position and time,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 62, 2205–2208 (1989) .
89W. Mauerer, On Colours, Keys, and Correlations: Multimode
Parametric Downconversion in the Photon Number Basis , doc-
toralthesis, Friedrich-Alexander-Universit¨ at Erlangen-N¨ urnberg
(F AU) (2009).
90A. Christ, K. Laiho, A. Eckstein, K. N. Cassemiro, and C. Sil-
berhorn, “Probing multimode squeezing with correlation fu nc-
tions,” New Journal of Physics 13, 033027 (2011) .
91E. Fitzke, R. Krebs, T. Haase, M. Mengler, G. Alber, and
T. W alther, “Time-dependent POVM reconstruction for singl e-
photon avalanche photo diodes using adaptive regularizati on,”
New Journal of Physics (2022), 10.1088/1367-2630/ac5004 .
92D. T. Pegg and S. M. Barnett, “Retrodiction in quantum op-
tics,” Journal of Optics B: Quantum and Semiclassical Optics
1, 442–445 (1999) .
93S. M. Barnett, D. T. Pegg, and J. Jeﬀers, “Bayes’ theo-
rem and quantum retrodiction,” Journal of Modern Optics 47,
1779–1789 (2000) .
94S. M. Barnett, “Quantum retrodiction,” in Quantum Informa-
tion and Coherence , edited by E. Andersson and P. ¨Ohberg
(Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2014) pp. 1–30.
95S. M. Barnett, J. Jeﬀers, and D. T. Pegg, “Quantum retrod-
iction: Foundations and controversies,” Symmetry 13 (2021),
10.3390/sym13040586.
96S. M. Barnett, L. S. Phillips, and D. T. Pegg, “Imperfect pho-
todetection as projection onto mixed states,” Optics Communi-
cations 158, 45–49 (1998) .
97O. Jedrkiewicz, R. Loudon, and J. Jeﬀers, “Retrodiction for
optical attenuators, ampliﬁers, and detectors,” Phys. Rev. A
70, 033805 (2004) .
98N. Montaut, L. Sansoni, E. Meyer-Scott, R. Ricken, V. Quirin g,
H. Herrmann, and C. Silberhorn, “High-eﬃciency plug-and-
play source of heralded single photons,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 8,
024021 (2017) .
99V. V. Dodonov, O. V. Man’ko, and V. I. Man’ko, “Multi-
dimensional hermite polynomials and photon distribution f or
polymode mixed light,” Phys. Rev. A 50, 813–817 (1994) .
100P. Kok and S. L. Braunstein, “Multi-dimensional hermite pol y-
nomials in quantum optics,” Journal of Physics A: Mathematical
and General 34, 6185–6195 (2001) .
101J. Huh, “Multimode bogoliubov transformation and husimi’s q-
function,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1612, 012015
(2020).
102S. Berkowitz and F. J. Garner, “The calculation of multidi-
mensional hermite polynomials and gram-charlier coeﬃcien ts,”
Mathematics of Computation 24, 537–545 (1970) .
103G. Cariolaro and G. Pierobon, “Fock expansion of multimode
pure gaussian states,” Journal of Mathematical Physics 56,
122109 (2015) .
104D. S. Phillips, M. W alschaers, J. J. Renema, I. A. W almsley,
N. Treps, and J. Sperling, “Benchmarking of gaussian boson
sampling using two-point correlators,” Phys. Rev. A 99, 023836
(2019).
105B. Gupt, J. Izaac, and N. Quesada, “The walrus: a library
for the calculation of hafnians, hermite polynomials and ga us-
sian boson sampling,” Journal of Open Source Software 4, 1705
(2019).
106S. Barnett and P. M. Radmore, Methods in Theoretical Quan-
tum Optics , Oxford Series in Optical and Imaging Sciences (Ox-
ford University Press, 2002).
107R. Chattamvelli and R. Shanmugam, Generating Functions in
Engineering and the Applied Sciences (Morgan & Claypool
Publishers, 2019).
108H. S. Wilf, Generatingfunctionology, 2nd ed. (Elsevier, 2014).
109W. P. Schleich, Quantum Optics in Phase Space , 1st ed. (Wiley,
2001).
110N. L¨ utkenhaus, “Security against individual attacks for realistic
quantum key distribution,” Phys. Rev. A 61, 052304 (2000) .